Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 3: Security CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 3-2: Attack Vectors Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: Differentiate between brute force and social engineering attacks. Explain a denial-of-service attack. Describe various attack vectors including IP spoofing, ARP cache poisoning, session hijacking, and VLAN hopping. Explain wireless attack vectors including evil twin, rogue AP, war driving, and WEP/WPA attacks. Discuss the threat caused by malicious insiders. Describe various ways to reduce your attack surface. Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. • Attack Vectors are any paths by which an intruder can gain access to or cause damage to a computer system or network. • Attack Surfaces are any potentially vulnerable areas of a computer system, which can be targeted by an attack. Attack Vectors Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Brute Force • Brute Force attacks use no special tricks or vulnerabilities to work. • Typical brute force attack – using password cracking tool to try thousands of possible username and password combinations to access a server. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Denial of Service • Any attack which seeks to prevent a server (or other device) from responding to its users. • Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) – an attack where a large number of nodes attempt to communicate with a server at the same time, preventing or delaying the server from responding to normal user requests. • Botnet – a group of computers under the control of a single entity, usually caused by malware, which can be leveraged to implement a DDoS attack or other coordinated attack. • Traffic Spike – often the main indicator of a coordinated attack is a significant spike in the amount of network traffic around a particular server or device. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Denial of Service (contd.) • Reflective attacks – a Denial of Service (DoS) attack that redirects traffic from other servers to overwhelm the target. • Amplification attacks – a reflective DoS attack in which the traffic sent from the reflection source is far greater than the traffic needed to initiate the reflection. • Example: Hacker spoofs the target machine’s IP address and requests DNS or NTP info from one or more “Open Resolver” DNS or NTP servers. • Friendly/Unintentional DoS – when non-malicious traffic overwhelms a server in what appears to be a DoS attack. • Smurfing – a nearly obsolete form of DoS attack involving spoofing an IP address and then sending a PING request to a broadcast address on another network. All devices on the network receive the PING and have to respond, thus flooding the network, but most routers disable this feature on broadcast addresses now. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Physical Attack • Access to a server or network can be prevented by physically damaging the equipment. These attacks can be mitigated by preventing physical access to the equipment. • Permanent Denial of Service (PDoS) – a term used when a server or network is permanently disabled by physical attacks, or by causing permanent damage remotely (e.g. damaging the firmware with a remote flash attack, “phlashing”). Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Spoofing • Spoofing = pretending. • IP Spoofing – Packet headers are altered so that packets from one device appear to be coming from another IP. • Used as a way to get through filters and firewalls, or as a way to setup other attacks such as a “Man-in-the-middle” attack. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. ARP Cache Poisoning • ARP – Address Resolution Protocol, used to translate IP addresses into MAC addresses. • ARP Cache – a table each device builds and maintains which matches IP addresses to MAC addresses based on ARP packets received (not just ARP packets requested). • ARP Cache Poisoning is a technique by which a local machine sends ARP packets to redirect IP packets intended for another device to itself or to another host. • Only works on the local segment • Also called ARP Spoofing or ARP Poison Routing Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Man-In-The-Middle • A Man-in-the-middle attack occurs when a compromised computer intercepts communication between two hosts by pretending to be the other host. • Can be used to impersonate: • Servers • Critical PCs • Websites • Wireless Access Points • Financial Gateways Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Packet / Protocol Abuse • Imagine a hacker gains control of a key computer and needs to send information outside the network, but the firewall is blocking their TCP packets. • One option: encapsulate TCP packets into DNS protocol packets using a tool such as Iodine. • This is also called Protocol Tunneling. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Other Attacks • Session Hijacking – after two machines authenticate in a session (conversation), the hacker steals the session ID and redirects traffic to replace one of the two original devices in the session. • VLAN Hopping – communicating outside of your designated VLAN by adding a fake VLAN ID tag and communicating over at least two switches. • The first switch passes your packets to the second switch, adding a real VLAN ID. • The second switch removes the real VLAN ID, exposing the fake VLAN ID, which may be routed to the target VLAN. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Social Engineering • Social Engineering refers to using non-technical means to gain access to an otherwise secured network. • Social Engineering techniques may include: • Phone calls • Emails • “Lost” flash drives or other media • Social Engineering is the most difficult threat to defend against. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Wireless Attacks • Several attack vectors are unique to wireless networks: • Evil twin – Using a WAP with the same SSID as a legitimate WAP to connect to an organization’s wireless devices for a peer-to-peer attack. • Rogue AP – Any WAP connected to your network but not under your control. • War driving – Scanning for unsecured access points while driving around. • War chalking – Documenting known compromised access points with chalk (or online). • WEP/WPA/WPA2/WPS attacks – attacks to try and break the password on a wireless access point. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Bluetooth Attacks • Bluejacking – sending unsolicited messages to a nearby computer or device via Bluetooth. • Bluesnarfing – intercepting Bluetooth connections or taking control of a device via Bluetooth. • Both can be mitigated by turning off “discoverability” in Bluetooth devices. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Malware • Malware (malicious software, including viruses) can be a factor in network attacks. • Malware infections can potentially: • Collect passwords • Look for files or specific data • Allow hackers remote access into the network Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Insider Threat • The best network protections available are useless if a malicious employee with sufficient access wants to cause harm. • Disgruntled users can: • Erase files and data • Physically damage equipment • Install malware or hacking tools Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Other Terms • Compromised System – any computer or device which is under the control of an intruder. • Zero Day Attack: • when an exploit is discovered in an operating system or program and is used by hackers before a fix is available, or • When a new virus or malware is discovered that is not yet detected by anti-malware defenses. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Vulnerabilities – Reducing Your Attack Surface • Unnecessary running services – turn off • Open ports – block at firewall or on local PC • Unpatched/legacy systems – move to separate subnet, disconnect from internet • Unencrypted channels – don’t use • Clear text credentials – make sure connections are encrypted Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Vulnerabilities – Reducing Your Attack Surface (contd.) • Unsecure protocols – discontinue if possible • TELNET • HTTP • SLIP • FTP • TFTP • SNMPv1 and SNMPv2 • TEMPEST/RF emanation – NATO and NSA certification for spying by measuring unintended emanations. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Your web server is being overwhelmed with traffic from multiple sources. It’s most likely due to this type of attack. 1 Man-in-the-middle DDoS Port Scanner Advanced Persistent Threat Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Your web server is being overwhelmed with traffic from multiple sources. It’s most likely due to this type of attack. An attack where a large number of nodes attempt to communicate with a server at the same time is a Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack. b. Man-in-the-middle DDoS Port Scanner Advanced Persistent Threat 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which of these best describes a man-in-the-middle attack? 2 When a computer is infected with malware. When IP packets are modified to appear to be from another address When an outside party sets up a wireless access point with the same SSID as an organization’s legitimate access points. When a compromised computer intercepts communication between two hosts by pretending to be the hosts themselves. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which of these best describes a man-in-the-middle attack? IP Spoofing (b) may be involved in a man-in-the-middle attack, but the attack itself is best described by option (d). d. When a computer is infected with malware. When IP packets are modified to appear to be from another address When an outside party sets up a wireless access point with the same SSID as an organization’s legitimate access points. When a compromised computer intercepts communication between two hosts by pretending to be the hosts themselves. 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) is an attack where a large number of nodes attempt to communicate with a server at the same time, preventing or delaying the server from responding to normal user requests • IP Spoofing is a type of attack where packet headers are altered so that packets from one device appear to be coming from another IP. • A Man-in-the-middle attack occurs when a compromised computer intercepts communication between two hosts by pretending to be the other host. • ARP Cache Poisoning is a technique by which a local machine sends ARP packets to redirect IP packets intended for another device to itself or to another host. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Network Hardening Techniques’. This concludes ‘Attack Vectors’.