Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 4: Trouble Shooting CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 4-3: Troubleshooting Wireless Networks Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Describe three causes of signal loss. • Explain the problem caused by overlapping channels. • Define signal-to-noise ratio and its relationship to power levels. • Discuss the difference between bandwidth saturation and device saturation. • Explain the difference between thin access points and thick or fat access points, and the use of LWAPP in managing thin access points. • Describe the problems caused by having the wrong encryption type or wrong antenna type. Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Troubleshooting Wireless • WLANS often benefit more from troubleshooting and optimization than wired LANs. • WLAN speed can be affected more than wired LANs. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Wireless Basics • Throughput – a measure of the speed data travels on the connection. • Frequency – the radio wavelengths used by a given wireless connection. • Channels – predefined blocks of frequencies • In the 2.4GHz band up to 14 channels are defined (11 usable in the US). • In the 5GHz band the available standard 20MHz channels vary by country, but 23 are available in the US. • Some access points can use “fatter” channels of 40, 80, or 120MHz for more throughput. • Distance – how far the wireless device is from the wireless access point (AP). Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Signal Loss • Signal loss is a weak or non-existent wireless signal, and may be caused by: • Distance • Environmental factors, especially concrete/brick walls or metal studs • Interference, especially from other devices in the 2.4GHz band • Consider repositioning your AP for better signal coverage, or adding an additional AP to compensate for environmental barriers. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Interference • Signal interference can significantly decrease overall throughput by forcing APs and clients to retransmit corrupted frames. • In the 2.4GHz band (802.11b, g, ac, and sometimes n) interference can come from other electronics which use this spectrum, including Bluetooth, cordless phones, and microwave ovens. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Channel Issues • Overlapping Channels • In the 2.4GHz band there are 11 usable channels, but each channel overlaps 2-4 adjacent channels. • For an optimal signal without interferences, channels should be chosen which do not overlap other nearby APs. • In 802.11n and 802.11ac, fatter channels can be used to increase bandwidth, but these can be more likely to overlap. • Mismatched channels – with certain settings APs and clients can be forced into using different channels (e.g. 3 and 4). While some signaling may work, mismatched channels are unlikely to be usable. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Signal, Noise, and Bounce • Wireless APs transmit at a certain power level. • Increasing the power (if possible) can increase distance and potentially reduce interference. • The Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) is a measurement of the intended signal from a wireless device compared with the normal background noise, measured in decibels (db). • 10-15db is the minimum acceptable • 25-40db is good • 41db+ is excellent • Increasing transmit power can improve SNR. • Higher power signals can also bounce off walls and other surfaces, increasing range but also creating multiple signals (multipath propagation/degradation) and may cause clients to connect to a distant AP rather than a nearby one. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Saturation • Device Saturation is when a given AP or device is overwhelmed with too many connections. • Bandwidth Saturation is when too many devices are trying to use the same frequencies, overwhelming the available bandwidth. • Adding more Access Points, at different bands, can solve saturation effects. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Thin vs. Thick • “Thick” or “Fat” wireless access points handle management, security, authentication, and the connection to the wired switch. • “Thin” access points offload most of the management functions to a separate, shared WLAN Controller via LWAPP (Lightweight Access Point Protocol). • “Thin” access points may be less likely to experience device saturation, BUT overworking the WLAN Controller is still possible. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Other Wireless Issues • Rogue Access Point – an AP within range of your wireless clients which uses the same SSID in an attempt to gain access to those devices, possibly for a man-in-the-middle attack. • Open Networks – using an AP with no encryption set at all. Besides leaving your network more vulnerable, open access points make it easy for intruders to spy on packets sent by any device connected to the open AP. • Wrong SSID – often caused when an AP is replaced and the new SSID is manually set and mistyped. • Wrong Encryption – If an AP is set with the wrong encryption, it could mean clients connect at too low a speed or not at all. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Antennas • Different antennas serve different purposes. • Omnidirectional antennas radiate a signal in all directions, but generally along a horizontal plane. • Directional antennas create a “cone” of signal in a specific direction. • When clients are unable to “see” an Access Point, consider whether the antenna on the client or the AP may be incorrectly configured. • MIMO technologies can make use of multiple device antennas to increase throughput. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Untested Updates • Updating Access Points and wireless devices with newer software and firmware generally improves their performance and security. • However, updates are not perfect and may cause unintended consequences. • Testing updates on sample equipment to verify performance before rolling them out to the entire network is a good idea. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Quiz Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which of the following is NOT a possible environmental cause of signal loss? 1 Distance Concrete Interference Overlapping channels Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which of the following is NOT a possible environmental cause of signal loss? Overlapping channels can degrade throughput but is not an environmental issue and does not cause signal loss. d. Distance Concrete Interference Overlapping channels 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which of these is a problem created when an access point is overwhelmed with too many connections? 2 Bandwidth Saturation Device Saturation Overlapping Channels Thick Access Point Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which of these is a problem created when an access point is overwhelmed with too many connections? Device saturation is when an access point is overwhelmed with too many connections. b. Bandwidth Saturation Device Saturation Overlapping Channels Thick Access Point 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which of the following is an AP within range of your wireless clients which uses the same SSID in an attempt to gain access to those devices? 3 Man-in-the-middle Open Network Wrong SSID Rogue AP Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which of the following is an AP within range of your wireless clients which uses the same SSID in an attempt to gain access to those devices? A rogue access point is an AP within range of your wireless clients which uses the same SSID in an attempt to gain access to those devices. d. Man-in-the-middle Open Network Wrong SSID Rogue AP 3 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • WLANS often benefit more from troubleshooting and optimization than wired LANs. • Frequency refers to the radio wavelengths used by a given wireless connection, and Channels are predefined blocks of frequencies. • Signal interference can significantly decrease overall throughput by forcing APs and clients to retransmit corrupted frames. • The Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) is a measurement of the intended signal from a wireless device compared with the normal background noise, measured in decibels (db). • A Rogue Access Point is an AP within range of your wireless clients which uses the same SSID in an attempt to gain access to those devices, possibly for a man-in-the-middle attack. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Troubleshooting Copper Cabling ’. This concludes ‘Troubleshooting Wireless Networks’.