Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 4: Trouble Shooting CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 4-5: Troubleshooting Fiber Cabling Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Explain bend radius limitations and their effect on fiber cabling. • List distance limitations of common types of fiber cabling. • Describe wavelength, fiber type, and connector mismatches. • Discuss the possible causes and effects of a bad SFP/GBIC. Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Basic Fiber Problems • Bend Radius Limitations – fiber cabling is more fragile than copper and can break or fail if the wire is twisted or bent beyond its stated bend radius limitation. • Dirty connectors – fiber connections must transmit light without undue refraction or distortion, and so are more susceptible to dirty connectors on cables or switch/router ports. • Distance limitations – although generally much longer than copper, fiber cabling will suffer from signal attenuation (Db loss) if used beyond its recommended maximum distance: • 100baseFX: 2km • 10GbaseSR: 400m • 10GbaseER: 40km • 10GbaseSW: 300m Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Fiber Mismatches • A Fiber type mismatch occurs when two different types of fiber cabling are used on the same segment (e.g. Splicing single-mode and multimode or multimode with different sized cores). • As much as 99% of the signal can be lost in a fiber type mismatch! • A wavelength mismatch most often occurs with single strand fiber cabling, which can accommodate transmitting and receiving at the same time on different wavelengths. To work properly one end must terminate in a 1310/1550 media converter and the other end with a 1550/1310 media converter. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Fiber Mismatches (contd.) • A connector mismatch occurs when trying to connect a fiber cable of one type to switch ports of another type. • Purchasing cables to match your equipment (and installation tools) is critical with fiber! Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Bad GBIC/SFP • GBIC (Gigabit Interface Converter) and SFP (Small Factor Pluggable, a smaller type of gigabit Ethernet controller) convert gigabit Ethernet from a switch or router into a high speed connection over fiber optic cables (or other connections). • Problems with GBIC or SFP modules may be caused by foreign objects in the GBIC slot, by problems with the cables connected to the GBIC, or by a faulty or incompatible GBIC module. • Specific GBIC or SFP modules must match the type of fiber cabling being used. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Quiz Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which fiber type is best for a cabling run of over 10km? 1 100baseFX 10GbaseSR 10GbaseER 10GbaseSW Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which fiber type is best for a cabling run of over 10km? 10GbaseER (extended range) has a maximum recommended distance of 40km. c. 100baseFX 10GbaseSR 10GbaseER 10GbaseSW 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Your fiber cable has a broken optical core. What is the most likely cause? 2 Connector mismatch Dirty connector Exceeded the bend radius limitation Fiber type mismatch Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Your fiber cable has a broken optical core. What is the most likely cause? The bend radius limitation is the maximum you can bend or twist a fiber cable before it breaks. c. Connector mismatch Dirty connector Exceeded the bend radius limitation Fiber type mismatch 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Fiber cabling is more fragile than copper and can break or fail if the wire is twisted or bent beyond its stated bend radius. • A Fiber type mismatch occurs when two different types of fiber cabling are used on the same segment (e.g. Splicing single-mode and multimode or multimode with different sized cores). • A connector mismatch occurs when trying to connect a fiber cable of one type to switch ports or GBIC ports of another type. • Purchasing cables to match your equipment (and installation tools) is critical with fiber. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Troubleshooting Common Network Issues’. This concludes ‘Troubleshooting Fiber Cabling’.