Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 2: Operations CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 2-2: Metrics and Reports Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Describe the importance of reports and metrics • Explain the meaning and purpose of a baseline • Define a bottleneck • Discuss the purpose of log management • Explain utilization and its role in removing bottlenecks • Describe attributes that may be reported by interface monitoring Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Working With Reports and Metrics Network servers, monitoring tools, and many network devices can produce logs and reports. Quantifiable data such as capacity, utilization, and bandwidth that are produced by reports or other sources are called metrics. Understanding how to read reports and analyze metrics is an important part of being a network administrator. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Baseline Reporting starts with having a Baseline – a measurement of performance under “normal” conditions. Baselines provide a basis for comparison in future reports. Creating a Baseline is called Baselining. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Bottleneck Bottleneck--A point of congestion in a system that occurs when workloads arrive at a given point more quickly than that point can handle them. Addressing the bottleneck is the most efficient way to improve performance in any system. Bottlenecks are usually related to speed or bandwidth. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Log Management Log management refers to dealing with large volumes of computer-generated log messages (also known as audit records, audit trails, event-logs, etc.) Log Management includes • Log collection • Centralized aggregation • Long-term retention • Log rotation (rename, compress, delete) • Log analysis (in real-time and in bulk after storage) • Log search and reporting. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Utilization One of the most important metrics derived from logs and reports is Utilization–how much of a resource is being used. High utilization indicates a resource may be insufficient and is causing a bottleneck. Utilization is often measured for: • Bandwidth (across any segment or total) • Storage • Network device CPU • Network device memory • Wireless channel utilization Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Graphing Utilization and some other metrics are easier to understand in a graph rather than comparing a number to a baseline. Graphs usually show values over time, such as bandwidth or CPU utilization. Graphing tools are often included in network monitoring devices and applications. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Link Status Link status typically refers to a visual indicator that is favorable, neutral, or unfavorable. • Green is favorable/connected • Yellow or Red indicates issues • Off indicates disconnected Link Status can be checked visually on the device or, for many devices, via a dashboard or via SNMP Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Interface Monitoring Most managed network devices include a function to monitor their interface. This is often done via an online dashboard or control panel, which provides insight into the device’s status. Attributes monitored can include: • Link Status • Errors • Utilization • Discards • Packet drops • Interface resets • Speed and duplex Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Measuring network parameters under normal conditions to compare against future performance is called _________? 1 Utilization Bottleneck Link Status Baselining Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Measuring network parameters under normal conditions to compare against future performance is called _________? Measuring network parameters under normal conditions as a base for future comparison is called creating a baseline, or baselining. d. Utilization Bottleneck Link Status Baselining 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. From network reports you can see that your router is frequently unable to handle the amount of traffic being generated. Your router is a ___________. 2 Baseline Metric Packet Drop Bottleneck Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. From network reports you can see that your router is frequently unable to handle the amount of traffic being generated. Your router is a ___________. A bottleneck is a point of congestion in a system that occurs when workloads arrive at a given point more quickly than that point can handle them. d. Baseline Metric Packet Drop Bottleneck 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Quantifiable data such as capacity, utilization, and bandwidth that are produced by reports or other sources are called metrics. • Baselines provide a basis for comparison in future reports. • Bottleneck--A point of congestion in a system that occurs when workloads arrive at a given point more quickly than that point can handle them. • Log management refers to dealing with large volumes of computer-generated log messages. • One of the most important metrics derived from logs and reports is Utilization – how much of a resource is being used. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Configuration Management’. This concludes ‘Metrics and Reports’.