Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 4: Trouble Shooting CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 4-8: Troubleshooting Common WAN Issues Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Define Customer Premise Equipment (CPE) and demarc. • Discuss how DNS issues, interference, and the split horizon issue can affect WAN connectivity. • Describe WAN issues specific to satellite connections. • Explain how company security policy can emulate a WAN issue. Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Troubleshooting Responsibility • WAN providers typically guarantee service up to a point known as the demarc. • Troubleshooting from the demarc to and through the internal LAN is the client’s responsibility. • Troubleshooting outside the demarc is the WAN provider’s responsibility. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Customer Premise Equipment (CPE) Demarc Smart Jack / NIU CSU/DSU CPE • CPE is the equipment owned by and maintained by the organization (also called DTE, data terminal equipment). • The WAN provider can run a loopback test up to the Smart Jack/NIU. • In some cases copper line drivers/repeaters are used to extend the demarc connection to another floor or building – in those cases the drivers/repeaters become another element in any troubleshooting. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Loss of Internet Connectivity • The most common WAN issue is probably loss of Internet connectivity. In those cases: • Check the WAN interface for errors. Link status may be accessible from the CSU/DSU panel. • DNS issues manifest when LAN devices can access external IP addresses but not external domain names. If the WAN providers’ DNS servers are not responding correctly, alternate DNS servers can be used for testing. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Loss of Internet Connectivity (contd.) • Misconfiguration between the CPE router and the CSU/DSU can also cause connectivity issues. • Verify speed and duplex. • Check the router WAN configuration settings and error log. • Interference can be an issue with wireless WAN connections. • Repositioning antennas or switching channels (where possible) may solve the issue. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Satellite Issues • Satellite WAN connections can involve additional troubleshooting steps. • Satellite links can be slow or non-existent during severe weather conditions such as storms or high wind. • Debris such as snow or leaves on the satellite dish can impede or block reception. • Satellite dishes need a clear line-of-sight to a compatible satellite. • Even when working properly, satellite WANs have much higher latency than other WAN types. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Fair Access Policy • Some WAN providers (especially satellite-based providers) implement a “Fair Access Policy” which limits or throttles bandwidth after an account has reached a preset download threshold. • Depending on the provider, the limit may be in place for 24 hours or until the next billing cycle. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Frame Relay - Split Horizon • Split Horizon is a technique to prevent routing loops. • Frame Relay WAN connections disable split horizon by default. • This is normal, but can cause problems for some protocols and tests. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Company Security Policy • In some cases a company’s security policy (implemented at a firewall or router) can mimic WAN issues. • For example, the policy may block access from certain applications or to certain sites. • The policy could also choose to throttle (limit) bandwidth on certain applications or ports, or to certain sites, rather than an outright block. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Quiz Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. The point where the WAN provider's responsibility ends is called the ________ . 1 CPE Firewall Demarc Router Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. The correct answer is The point where the WAN provider's responsibility ends is called the ________ . 1 CPE Firewall Demarc Router The demarc is the point that separates the WAN from the LAN. c Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which of the following is a symptom of a Fair Access Policy? 2 two-factor authentication for all users throttled WAN bandwidth load-balancing RADIUS server Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. The correct answer is Which of the following is a symptom of a Fair Access Policy? 2 two-factor authentication for all users throttled WAN bandwidth load-balancing RADIUS server A Fair Access Policy from a WAN provider may throttle bandwidth after a preset download limit. b Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • WAN providers typically guarantee service up to a point known as the demarc. • CPE is the LAN equipment owned by and maintained by the organization. • Misconfiguration between the CPE router and the CSU/DSU, such as speed or duplex settings, can also cause connectivity issues. • Even when working properly, satellite WANs have much higher latency than other WAN types. • Some WAN providers (especially satellite-based providers) implement a “Fair Access Policy” which limits or throttles bandwidth after an account has reached a preset download threshold. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Policies and Procedures’. This concludes ‘Troubleshooting Common WAN Issues’.