Introduction to Cybersecurity Cybersecurity Fundamentals Learning Objectives Explain the fundamentals of cybersecurity Identify threat actors, attacks, and mitigation Describe security policies, procedures, standards, and baseline By the end of lessons you will be able to: Elaborate the cybersecurity mitigation methods Fundamentals of Cybersecurity What Is Cybersecurity? A set of technologies used for protecting systems, networks, and programs from digital attacks, damage, and unauthorized access. Attack Damage Unauthorized Access Address Threats Why Cybersecurity? The world relies on technology more than ever before, and as a result digital data creation has surged. Increased rate of cyber crime Increased demand to protect data Presence of crime syndicates Presence of cyber armies Presence of financial frauds Information Security and Cybersecurity Refers to processes and tools designed to protect sensitive information Encompasses paper documents and digital and intellectual property Cybersecurity Is a set of techniques used to protect the integrity of networks, programs, and data Is a component of information security Information Security Cyber Crime Statistics 25+ million records exposed everyday in 2018 Cyber Crime to cost $6 trillion in 2021 Healthcare: Ransomware attacks will quadruple 300 billion passwords exist worldwide in 2020 24,000 malicious mobile apps blocked daily 60% of fraud originates from mobile devices Factors Affecting Cybersecurity Technology Business Plans Platforms and tools Risk tolerance Outsourcing service providers Industry trends Network connectivity Level of IT complexity New or emerging security tools Operational support for security 1 2 3 4 5 Nature of business Mergers and acquisitions and partnerships CIA Triad Authorized parties can access the information CIA Triad Information must be available on demand CIA Triad Authorized people can add, remove, or alter information Governance, Risk Management, and Compliance (GRC) Scope of GRC Governance, Risk Management, and Compliance of every organization is different and varies based on the type of organization. Mission Regulations Size It depends on organization mission, size, industry, culture, and legal regulations. Culture Industry Responsibility of GRC The ultimate responsibility of the GRC program is to protect their assets and operations IT, including their infrastructure and information. GRC Governance Risk Management Compliance The board of directors and senior management of an organization are responsible for Governance. Provides strategic direction Ascertains whether risk is being managed appropriately Ensures that the objectives are achieved Verifies that the organization's resources are being used responsibly It is the process by which the organization manages risks to acceptable levels. These risks may include investment risk, physical risk, and cyber risk. Governance Risk Management Compliance GRC It is the act of adhering to mandated requirements defined by laws and regulations. Governance Risk Management Compliance GRC Roles of Cybersecurity Cybersecurity Roles The success of a cybersecurity role is ultimately the responsibility of the board of directors. Security Management Cybersecurity Practitioners Executive Committee Board of Directors Approaches to Cybersecurity Compliance-based security Risk-based security Ad-hoc approach Cybersecurity: Key Terms Cybersecurity: Key Terms Inherent risk Residual risk Illustration: Basics of Cybersecurity Threat Actors, Attacks, and Mitigation Threat Actor A threat actor or malicious actor is a person or entity that is responsible for an event or incident that impacts or has the potential to impact the safety or security of another entity. Threat Actor Categories Script kiddies Hactivist Competitors Organized crime Insiders Nation states APT Threat Actor categories are: Threats to a System Natural environmental threats Supply system threats Man-made threats Sociopolitical threats Main threats to an organization should be considered. Malware Malware is any software that is intentionally designed to cause damage to a computer, server, client, or computer network. Types of Malware Worms Viruses Trojans Spyware Adware Rootkit Backdoor Logic bombs Ransomware Worms Worms are self-replicating codes designed to penetrate computer systems. Virus Virus is a malicious code that replicates by attaching to an executable code. Trojans Trojans are programs that claim to perform one function but does another, typically malicious. Spyware Spyware is a software aimed to steal personal or organizational information. Adware Adware is a software that displays endless ads and pop-up windows. Rootkit Rootkits are designed to modify the operating systems’ operations to facilitate non-standard functionality. Backdoor Backdoor provides the attacker with unauthorized remote access to a system by exploiting security vulnerabilities. Logic Bombs Logic bombs infect a system and lie dormant until they are triggered by a specific condition. Ransomware Ransomware attempts to extort money from the user by infecting and taking control of a victim's machine. Malware Attacks Kovter WannaCry Zeus or Zbot Ghost Mirai Denial-of-Service Attack The purpose of DoS is to prevent access to the target system. Distributed Denial-of-Service It is a denial-of-service attack employing multiple attacking systems. Distributed Denial-of-Service The goal of DDoS is to prevent access to a specific system. DoS/DDoS Attacks GitHub was hit with 1.35 terabits per second of traffic. GitHub: 1.35 Tbps DoS/DDoS Attacks Cloudflare: 400 Gbps The attack was directed at a single computer with vulnerability. Application Layer Attacks They target computers by causing a fault in the operating system or applications. Application Layer Attacks They refer to a type of malicious behavior designed to target the top layer in the OSI model. Application Layer Attacks Cross-site scripting Buffer overflow Domain hijacking DoS/DDoS SQL injection DNS spoofing Software Codes and Security Programmers are responsible to write safe and high quality codes. Software Codes and Security Source codes are statements written using a computer programming language. Software Codes and Security Code review is a systematic examination or peer review of source code. Find mistakes Improve software quality Software Testing Methods Evaluates the security of software without running it Evaluates the security of software in a runtime environment Static Testing Dynamic Testing Software Testing Methods In March 2018, hackers hit Saks Fifth Avenue and Lord & Taylor, stealing debit and credit cards. 5 million records breached Software Testing Methods In May 2018, the concert and sporting event ticketing website, ticketfly was vandalized, taken down, and disrupted for a week. Security Attacks In August 2018, Russian hackers made millions selling credit card details stolen from almost 245,000 British Airways customers. Social Engineering It is the art of manipulating people, so they give up their confidential information violating the security principle. Social Engineering Attack Categories Whaling Phishing Phishing Spear Phishing There are several attack categories of social engineering. Social Engineering Attack Categories It is a fraudulent attempt to obtain sensitive information. It is targeted to a specific group or an individual. It targets wealthy and prominent individuals. Spear Phishing Phishing Whaling Phishing Social Engineering Attack: Ethereum Classic In 2017, Ethereum Classic website was hacked resulting in the loss of thousands of dollars in cryptocurrency. Social Engineering Attack: Ethereum Classic Impersonated Ethereum owner Gained access to domain registry Redirected the domain to their server Extracted cryptocurrency from the victims Security Policies and Procedures Security Management Plan Senior Management Middle Management Operations Management/IT Team End Users Initiates and defines policies Releases standards and policy guidelines Implements the controls and policies Must comply with the organization’s functions Types of Security Management Plan Strategic Plan Tactical Plan Operational Plan Types of Security Management Plan Strategic Plan Tactical Plan Operational Plan ●Is a long-term plan ●Defines security posture ●Is valid for five years and is renewed annually ●Helps understand security functions ●Helps in risk assessment Types of Security Management Plan Strategic Plan Tactical Plan Operational Plan ●Is a mid-term plan ●Provides detailed goals ●Is updated every year or two ●Is technology oriented Types of Security Management Plan Strategic Plan Tactical Plan Operational Plan ●Is a short-term plan ●Is highly detailed ●Is updated monthly or quarterly ●Spells out how to accomplish goals Security Policy • Is a strategic plan • Defines the scope of security • Outlines security objectives and framework • Identifies the functional areas • Outlines security goals and practices • Defines risk levels • Assigns responsibilities and requirements Types of Security Policy Organizational policy Issue-specific policy System-specific policy Focuses on individual systems Focuses on a specific service, department, or function Focuses on issues relevant to every aspect of the organization Security Policy Framework Standard Baseline Guideline Procedure ●Defines the minimum level of security ●Is system specific ●Establishes the common secure state Security Policy Framework Standard Baseline Guideline Procedure ●Offers recommendations on implementation ●Serves as an operating guide ●Is customized for each unique system Security Policy Framework Standard Baseline Guideline Procedure ●Is the final element of formalized security policy structure ●Describes actions for implementing the security mandates ●Is system and software specific ●Ensures integrity of the business process Security Policy Framework Standard Baseline Guideline Procedure ●Defines the compulsory requirements ●Provides a course of action ●Is a tactical document Due Care and Due Diligence Due Care Due Diligence ●Reasonable care is taken in protecting the organization ●Pertains to the legal duty of the organization ●Lack of due care is considered negligence ●Is about practicing the activities that maintain the due care effort ●Pertains to best practices that a company should follow ●Might not be legally liable Cybersecurity Mitigation Methods Information Technology Control An IT control is a procedure or policy that provides a reasonable assurance that: IT used by an organization is operating as intended The organization is in compliance with laws and regulations Data is reliable Countermeasure Computers Networks Operating systems It is an action or method that is applied to prevent, avert, or reduce potential threats to: Servers Information systems Countermeasure It helps to mitigate or reduce the potential risk. Control Categories Administrative controls Technical controls Physical controls Administrative Controls These are procedures and policies used to define employee actions toward sensitive information. Technical Controls These are hardware or software mechanisms used to protect important and confidential assets. Physical Controls These are security measures designed to deny unauthorized access. Physical Controls Deterrent Preventive Corrective Recovery Detective Compensating Defense in Depth or Layered Approach It is the act of using multiple layers of security controls to protect the integrity of information. Defense in Depth or Layered Approach Its intent is to provide increased security through intentional redundancy based on multi-layered security approach. Technical Personnel Procedural Physical Defense in Depth or Layered Approach Identity Management It is an organizational process for identifying, authenticating, and authorizing individuals or groups of people. Identified Authenticated Authorized Identity Management It enables the right users to access the right resources at the right time for the right reasons. IAM Components Authorization Authentication Central user repository User Management The components of IAM are: Identification and Authentication Identify a user or an application in the system Identification Authentication Prove that a user or an application is genuine Identification and Authentication Password Location Biometric Token card Something you know Something you have Where you are Something you are or do Multi-Factor Authentication It is an authentication method where a user is granted access after presenting two or more evidences. Two-Factor Authentication It is a subset of multi-factor authentication, confirming that users are granted access with a combination of two different factors. Multi-Factor Authentication It is an authentication method where a user is granted access after presenting two or more evidences. Authorization It is the process of determining what types of activities, resources, or services a user is permitted. Authorization A user may be authorized for different types of activity once authenticated. Accountability It is the traceability of actions performed on a system to a specific system entity. Accountability User identification and authentication support accountability User ID and password destroy accountability Auditing It is a manual or a systematic measurable technical assessment of a system or application. Reviewing applications and OS access controls Analyzing physical access to the systems Performing security vulnerability scans Interviewing staff Monitoring It describes the process of threat and data breach detection. Defining the behavior types to trigger alerts Taking actions on alerts as needed Patch Management It involves acquiring, testing, and installing multiple patches to an administered computer system. Patch Management Tasks Maintain knowledge of available patches Decide appropriate patches for particular systems Ensure that patches are installed properly Test systems after installation Document all associated procedures Patch Management: Example The outbreak of WannaCry ransomware became large and intense because of a missing security patch. System Hardening It is a collection of tools, techniques, and best practices to reduce vulnerability. Infrastructure Technology applications Systems Firmware System Hardening: Purpose It eliminates security risks and secures a system by reducing its attack surface. System Hardening Activities Hardening activities for a computer system includes: Update security patches and hotfixes on time Monitor security bulletins Close certain ports Use encryption Remove unnecessary programs and user accounts Create strong passwords Install anti-virus and spyware protection system Deny file sharing Change Control It is a systematic approach to manage all changes made to a product or system. Change Control: Purpose Services are not disrupted No unnecessary changes are made All changes are documented Resources are used efficiently Change Control: Purpose Change request Change approval board Implementation Review Possible rollback Formal RFC Asset Management It is the systematic process of developing, operating, maintaining, upgrading, and disposing of assets cost-effectively. Asset Management Lifecycle 1 2 3 4 5 Retirement and disposal Maintain Procurement Deploy and discover Support Data Management Data is the smallest piece of information in any form. Text documents Images Software programs Audio clips Data Management It is an administrative process to ensure the accessibility, reliability, and timeliness of the data for its users. Acquiring data Validating data Storing data Protecting data Processing data States of Data They describe the different modes whereby data is used by a computing equipment. Three Basic States of Data Data at rest Data in transit Data in use Information Lifecycle Archival: Backup, protection, and retention Disposal: Stored data for destruction Acquisition: Indexed system data Use: Challenges in protection Information Lifecycle It is an ongoing process Metadata must be at the right classification level Classification level must be attached to the information lifecycle It helps indicate the level of data protection It helps ensure data is protected Encryption It describes the different modes whereby data is used by a computing equipment. Encryption Encryption Protects information stored on computers Protects data in transit over networks Verifies the authenticity of a transaction Deters and detects alterations of data Cryptography Cryptography is the science of protecting information by encoding it into an unreadable format. Cryptography Factors Influencing Effective Encryption The inability to decrypt an entire cipher text Algorithm strength, secrecy, and difficulty of compromising a key The non-existence of back doors Types of Encryption Symmetric Encryption Asymmetric Encryption Symmetric Encryption • Uses one key to encrypt and decrypt • Uses less processing power • Shares the key with the receiver Symmetric encryption is based on the same key or private key to encrypt plain text and decrypt ciphertext. Symmetric Encryption 64-bit Data Encryption Standard (DES) Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) 128-bit to 256-bit Common private key cryptography systems: Asymmetric Encryption Solves the problem of sharing the key with the receiver Asymmetric Encryption Services of cryptography: Authentication Non-repudiation Confidentiality Validates the sender’s identity Prevents denial of action Controls who reads the data Incident Response It is an organized approach to address and manage the aftermath of a security breach. Incident Response: Goals Manages potential disruption to IT service Minimizes the adverse impact on business operations Reduces damage, recovery time, and costs Has normal service operations within SLAs Security Training It is an organized approach to addressing and managing the aftermath of a security breach or cyber attack. Security Awareness It is the process of exposing people to security issues so that they may be able to recognize them and better respond to them. Key Takeaways Cybersecurity refers to a set of techniques used to protect the integrity of network programs and data from attack, damage, and unauthorized access. Malware is a software that is designed to cause damage to a computer, server, client, or network. The types of malware include worm, spyware, virus, trojan, and logic bomb. Strategic plan, tactical plan, and operational plan are the types of security management plans. Change control is a systematic approach for managing all changes made to a product or system.