Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 4: Trouble Shooting CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 4-4: Troubleshooting Copper Cabling Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Define shorts, opens, and crosstalk as it applies to network cabling. • Discuss EMI/RFI and its effect on copper cabling. • List the maximum recommended distances for each category of Ethernet cabling. • Explain the likely symptoms of split pairs or Tx/Rx reversed wiring. • Describe some possible causes of a bad GBIC or bad SFP. Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Basic Copper Problems • Shorts – a condition when two copper wires are touching each other, creating one combined circuit. • Opens – a condition when there is a break or gap in the wiring, preventing any signal from passing through. • Incorrect Termination – mismatched wire pairs Standard End Crossover End Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Crosstalk • Crosstalk is when a signal transmitted on one circuit or wire pair affects the signal transmitted on another circuit or wire pair. • In Ethernet cables crosstalk often occurs due to EMI generated by one wire pair influencing the signal on another wire pair. • Crosstalk can be minimized by: • Using twisted-pair cables (and maintaining the twist ratio) • Using shielded cables • Separating cables. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. EMI and RFI • EMI/RFI – Electromagnetic Interference or radio- frequency interference, signal distortion caused by electromagnetic induction or electromagnetic radiation from an external source. • To mitigate EMI/RFI signal problems: • Use twisted-pair cabling • Use shielded cabling • Be mindful of cable placement - avoid running cable near EMI/RFI point sources such as lighting fixtures, electrical panels, and any radio transmitters. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Distance Limitations • Always remember copper cabling has a limited recommended distance. • Beyond the recommended distance, signal degradation and attenuation (Db loss) can cause packet loss or render the signal unusable. • For category 3, 5, 5e, and 6a cables the maximum recommended distance is 100m. • For category 6 cables the maximum distance is 55m. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Bad Connectors and Wiring • Bad connectors are problematic – they may work most of the time but fail sporadically. • Bad wiring can cause unexpected packet loss and signal degradation. • Testing with a Cable Certifier is a good way to find bad connectors and bad wiring. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Split pairs and Tx/Rx Reverse • What would happen if you swapped wires 1 and 3 on both ends of a EIA/TIA568b wired connector? • It will work, but not correctly. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Split pairs and Tx/Rx Reverse (contd.) • This is known as a Split Pair, where the pins are wired correctly but not in pairs. • Without the EMI/RFI protection of the twisted pairs, signal degradation is very likely. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Split pairs and Tx/Rx Reverse (contd.) • What would happen if the Transmit and Receive wires in a pair are inadvertently swapped? • Depending on the connected device, this may be auto-sensed as a crossover cable and may work correctly. Or it may not work at all. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Bad GBIC/SFP • GBIC (Gigabit Interface Converter) and SFP (Small Factor Pluggable, a smaller type of gigabit Ethernet controller) convert gigabit Ethernet from a switch or router into a high speed connection over fiber optic cables or other connections. • Problems with GBIC or SFP modules may be caused by foreign objects in the GBIC slot, by problems with the cables connected to the GBIC, or by a faulty or incompatible GBIC module. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Quiz Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. In copper cabling, an 'Open' is: 1 a condition when two copper wires are touching each other, creating one combined circuit a condition when there is a break or gap in the wiring, preventing any signal from passing through a condition where wire pairs are mismatched when a signal transmitted on one circuit or wire pair affects the signal transmitted on another circuit or wire pair Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. In copper cabling, an 'Open' is: A condition when there is a break or gap in the wiring, preventing any signal from passing through. b. a condition when two copper wires are touching each other, creating one combined circuit a condition when there is a break or gap in the wiring, preventing any signal from passing through. a condition where wire pairs are mismatched when a signal transmitted on one circuit or wire pair affects the signal transmitted on another circuit or wire pair 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which of the following is NOT a way to minimize crosstalk? 2 Use twisted-pair cables Use shielded cables Using plenum rather than PVC cables Separating cables Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which of the following is NOT a way to minimize crosstalk? Using twisted pair cables and shielded cables, and separating cables are ways to minimize crosstalk. c. Use twisted-pair cables Use shielded cables Using plenum rather than PVC cables Separating cables 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. What is the maximum recommended distance for Category 5 cabling? 3 55m 100m 300m 1km Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. What is the maximum recommended distance for Category 5 cabling? The maximum recommend distance for Category 3, 5, 5e, and 6a cabling is 100m. b. 55m 100m 300m 1km 3 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • An Open is a condition when there is a break or gap in the wiring, preventing any signal from passing through. • Crosstalk is when a signal transmitted on one circuit or wire pair affects the signal transmitted on another circuit or wire pair, and it can be minimized by using twisted pair cabling, by using shielded cabling, and by keeping cables separated. • EMI/RFI stands for electromagnetic interference or radio-frequency interference, which is signal distortion caused by electromagnetic induction or electromagnetic radiation from an external source. • A split pair in twisted-pair cabling is when the connector wiring matches up but the wire pairs are not in the correct locations. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Troubleshooting Fiber Cabling’. This concludes ‘Troubleshooting Copper Cabling’.