Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 1: Network Theory and Architecture CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 1-3: Topologies Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. ● Differentiate between Point-to-Point and Point-to-Multipoint networks ●Explain the difference between Client-Server and Peer-to-Peer networks ● Define Bus Topology ● Identify Ring Topology ● Discuss Star Topology ● Differentiate between Partial and Full Mesh Topology ●Identify Hybrid Topology After completing this lesson, you will be able to: Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. What is a Topology? • Topology is the interrelatedness and arrangement of constituent parts in a network. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Network Topologies Imagine you were inventing a new way to network. How would you connect the devices to each other? Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Bus Topology • One unbroken cable, terminated on each end, connecting to each computer with a “T” connector. • Bus Topology was common with older 10base2 and 10base5 networks using a coaxial cable. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Bus Topology – Pros and Cons • PROS: No central hardware (switches, hubs) needed. • CONS: Any disconnection anywhere in the cable stops all communication Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Ring Topology • This is similar to Bus Topology with one unbroken cable. • While Bus topology has two terminated cable ends, a Ring Topology is in a loop with no ends. • It has similar pros and cons compared to Bus: No central hardware is needed but any faults or disconnections bring down the entire network. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Star Topology • Each computer connects directly to a central point, usually a Switch, Hub, or Router. • Disconnections only affect the one computer on that link. • Most LANs and WLANs, today, use Star Topology. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Mesh Topology • Full Mesh: Every device connects to every other device. • Partial Mesh: Some nodes are in a Full Mesh, other nodes may only connect to 1 or 2 other devices. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Mesh Topology−Pros and Cons • PROS: Highly fault tolerant – no single failure will disrupt communication • CONS: Requires each node to be intelligent enough to manage its own communication Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Wireless Mesh Wireless mesh is frequently found in large wireless networks such as, on a campus or public area. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Hybrid Topology A mix of 2 or more network topologies Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Point-to-Point Communication Point-to-point communication is one dedicated communication connection between two devices. A traditional phone call is an example of point-to-point communications. ! Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Point-to-Multipoint Communication Point-to-multipoint communication is one device or node that connects to multiple devices. Wireless access points create Point-to-Multipoint networks ! Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Client-Server vs Peer-To-Peer Client-Server • A network arrangement where user computers and devices (“Clients”) primarily communicate with one or more central Servers. Peer-To-Peer • A network arrangement without a central server, where the clients communicate with each other directly Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Quiz Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. A network topology consisting of one unbroken cable, terminated on each end, is the _____ topology. 1 ring bus mesh fiber optic Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. A network topology consisting of one unbroken cable, terminated on each end, is the _____ topology. Bus topology consists of one unbroken cable, terminated on each end. b. ring bus mesh fiber optic 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. A dedicated communication connection between two devices is ________. 2 Cat5 Star Point-to-Point VPN Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. A dedicated communication connection between two devices is _________. Point-to-point is a dedicated communication connection between two devices. c. Cat5 Star Point-to-Point VPN 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Peer-to-peer refers to: 3 A network without a central server A bus topology network. A network protocol Multipoint communication Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Peer-to-peer refers to: 3 Peer-to-peer refers to a network where the hosts communicate directly with each other, without a central server. a. A network without a central server A bus topology network. A network protocol Multipoint communication Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Topology is the interrelatedness and arrangement of constituent parts in a network. • Common topology types are Bus, Ring, Star, Mesh, and Hybrid. • A Star topology is when each node connects directly to a hub or switch. • Client-Server is a network arrangement where, user computers and devices (“Clients”) primarily communicate with one or more central Servers. • Peer-to-Peer is a network arrangement without a central server, where the clients communicate with each other directly. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘WAN Technologies’. This concludes ‘Topologies’.