Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 3: Security CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 3-7: Forensic Concepts Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Describe the role of a first responder. • Discuss data breach concepts including securing the area, documenting the scene, chain of custody, and data transport. • Explain the function of eDiscovery tools. • Describe a legal hold. Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Forensics • Computer Forensics is the task of identifying, documenting, and recovering digital evidence. • Forensics is critical in the event of a security breach, both to document evidence for legal action and to identify where security measures should be improved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. First Responder • First Responder refers to the first IT professional to recognize the security breach. • Appropriate action by a First Responder can preserve important evidence and minimize damage from the security breach. • Incorrect action by a First Responder can cause more damage and/or destroy important evidence. • Training in proper First Responder procedures is important! Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Securing the Area • In a TV police show, police secure the physical area of a crime scene. • In the IT world, the “area” may be digital or physical (or both) and may include disconnecting users, shutting down rogue processes and applications, or even disconnecting a server or host from the network entirely. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Escalation • Sometimes securing the area involves decisions that will adversely impact hundreds or thousands of users, or potentially destroy important evidence. • IT professionals should have a clear chain of command and be able to escalate decisions to a senior manager when needed. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Documenting the Scene • Documenting the Scene can include: • Making copies of current router and server logs as well as any other relevant settings. • Saving screen captures of screens showing evidence of the breach. • Preserving a snapshot of current system activity, including logged-in users • If future testimony is a consideration, documentation should be done by two people. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Evidence Collection • Evidence should be collected in the order of volatility, including: 1. Memory contents 2. Swap files 3. Network processes 4. System processes 5. File system information 6. Raw disk/file information 7. Offline media (backup tapes, USB drives) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Data Transport and Chain of Custody • Chain of Custody refers to documenting who collected and who controlled the evidence at any point in time. If legal action is possible, documenting the chain of custody will make it more likely the evidence will be admissible in court. • Data Transport – when any evidence is being transported, physically or electronically, it must be sufficiently tagged so that it can be reconstructed after transport. Documenting the time data was transported is also helpful in keeping evidence admissible. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Forensic Report • A Forensics Report includes a summary of the evidence, including: • What happened • What evidence supports the situation • How the situation was remediated • How the situation will be prevented in the future • All evidence, including chain of custody and data transport information. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. eDiscovery • eDiscovery is a feature provided in some network applications, which facilitate producing evidence during legal proceedings. • Examples: Google Vault for Google Apps, In-Place eDiscovery for Microsoft Exchange Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Legal Considerations • A legal hold is a process that an organization uses to preserve all forms of relevant information when litigation is reasonably anticipated. • In addition, some industries (finance, medical) may require certain retention periods for key data. • Data Retention Policies document how corporate information should be maintained and destroyed to meet legal or company guidelines. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Your company is in a lawsuit, and the attorneys have requested copies of all e-mails which meet a certain criteria. Which tool would be most helpful in providing this information? 1 eDiscovery Chain of Custody Data Backups Security Policy Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Your company is in a lawsuit, and the attorneys have requested copies of all e-mails which meet a certain criteria. Which tool would be most helpful in providing this information? While data backups might be helpful, using an eDiscovery tool to search the e-mail archives and retrieve data based on the search criteria would be the most helpful. a. eDiscovery Chain of Custody Data Backups Security Policy 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. The first IT professional to recognize a data breach is referred to as the _________ . 2 Network Administrator First Responder Point of Entry eDiscovery Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. The first IT professional to recognize a data breach is referred to as the _________ . 2 First Responder refers to the first IT professional to recognize the security breach. b. Network Administrator First Responder Point of Entry eDiscovery Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • First Responder refers to the first IT professional to recognize the security breach. • In IT, securing the area after a data breach may include both physical and digital considerations. • Documenting the scene may include copying system logs, taking screen shots of relevant activity, and documenting current users. • Chain of Custody refers to documenting who collected and who controlled the evidence at any point in time. • eDiscovery is a feature provided in some network applications which facilitates producing evidence during legal proceedings. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Troubleshooting Methodologies’. This concludes ‘Forensic Concepts’.