Ubuntu Fundamentals Package Management Learning Objectives By the end of this lesson, you will be able to: Access the repository Apply the apt/apt-get command Install PPA Repository The repository list can be found in the /etc/apt/sources.list directory of Ubuntu OS. A repository can be defined as a central storage area for all software packages. Types of Repositories • Main • Restricted • Universe • Multiverse The four types of repositories to download software from are: This is a community-supported open-source software. Canonical will not support this in terms of providing updates for this release software. Types of Repositories Main Restricted Universe Multiverse This is the default repository and all the packages in this are free. This is a closed-source software supported by Canonical for a price till the end of the life cycle of the release. This includes closed-source software, such as adobe flash. It also includes open-source software with some restrictions. Repository Access To access a repository, the system should be connected to the internet. • Select the required repository from the Ubuntu software center console along with the source location. Repository Access • In the next tab, add repository URL into the file /etc/apt/sources.list. • To check for updates and new releases, use the command $ sudo apt-get update. Software with .deb Extension • In case the software packages are released in a .deb file format, there is no need to use the repository commands such as apt or apt-get. • Use the command $ sudo dpkg -i <package name> to directly install the software, and if there are any dependency failures, use the command $ sudo apt-get install -f. Introduction to apt/apt-get Command • The apt command is a CLI command used to download, install, and remove the software packages. • The earlier version of apt command was called apt-get command. • All new releases of Ubuntu have the apt command. Introduction to apt/apt-get Command • Install packages with the syntax: $ sudo apt install <app-package1> <app-package2> • Uninstall packages with the syntax: $ sudo apt <app-package1> • Remove orphaned application packages automatically. o While installing the packages, apt resolves the dependencies automatically. o Similarly, while uninstalling, it removes the critical dependencies of the application automatically. It is done by the command $ sudo apt autoremove. • Search packages with the syntax: $ sudo apt search <keyword>. Some of the frequently used apt commands are to: Update vs. Upgrade Update will check the availability of new versions of a given package, whereas upgrade will update the packages to a new version. Introduction to PPA • Personal Package Archives (PPA) are software packages that are released by the developer without any testing for publishing in the repository. • These are published separately and can be installed from the software center. Key Takeaways Repository can be defined as a central storage area for all software packages. $ sudo apt-get update command is used to check for updates to the software on the system. The apt command is a command-line interface command used to download, install, and remove the software packages. PPA or Personal Package Archives are software packages released by the developer without testing. Knowledge Check Knowledge Check A. B. C. D. 1 Which among the following is used to describe the storage space of software packages? Repository Cloud None of above Media Knowledge Check The correct answers is A. B. C. D. Which among the following is used to describe the storage space of software packages? Repository Cloud None of above 1 Repository is a storage space used to store software packages. Media B Knowledge Check A. B. C. D. 2 Which directory contains the URL for a repository? /etc /home /etc/apt/source.list /proc Knowledge Check The correct answer is A. B. C. D. 2 Which directory contains the URL for a repository? The file or directory /etc/apt/source.list contains the list of repositories available for download. C /etc /home /etc/apt/source.list /proc Knowledge Check A. B. C. D. 3 Which command is used to install software packages in Ubuntu? install apt download rpm Knowledge Check The correct answer is A. B. C. D. 3 Which command is used to install software packages in Ubuntu? The apt command is used to install software packages in Ubuntu. install apt download C rpm Knowledge Check A. B. C. D. 4 What does PPA represent? Packages released but not published in repositories Non-Ubuntu packages tar files CLI commands Knowledge Check The correct answer is A. B. C. D. 4 What does PPA represent? PPA represent the packages that are released by the developer without any testing for publishing. Packages released but not published in repositories Non-Ubuntu packages tar files CLI commands A