Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 3: Security CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 3-6: Network Access Control Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Define network access control. • Describe the role of 802.1x and posture assessment in network access control. • Explain the purpose of guest networks and quarantine networks. • Identify the difference between persistent and non-persistent agents. • Describe the function of edge control and access control. Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Network Access Control • Network Access Control – a system that allows organizations to restrict access to resources on their private network. • Primarily used in large enterprise for • BYOD • Role-based • Defend against Advanced Persistent Threats (APT) • “Who is on my network? Are they accessing data appropriately?” Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. 802.1x • 802.1X is an IEEE Standard for authenticating devices attempting to access a LAN or WLAN. • It is part of the IEEE 802.1 group of networking protocols. • 802.1x recognizes three components: • Supplicant – device attempting to connect • Authenticator – Access Point or Router handling the connection • Authentication Server – a server (usually Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service or RADIUS) which verifies the user or device and (optionally) provides access information, such as required VLAN Authenticator Supplicant Authentication Server Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Posture Assessments Posture assessment is the evaluation of system security based on the applications and settings that a particular system is using. Typical posture assessment criteria might include: • Operating System version • Service pack version • Malware definitions updated Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Persistent and Non-Persistent Agents • Posture Assessment is performed by an agent installed on the user’s device. • If the agent is permanently installed (for use in future assessments), it is referred to as a Persistent Agent. • A non-persistent agent runs the assessment then uninstalls itself. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. • Non-compliant machines can be blocked entirely or placed into a limited-access quarantine network. • If post-assessment the device passes, the device can join the regular network. • Some NAC servers can perform remediation services on quarantined devices. Quarantine Network Internet VPN Client / Supplicant Firewall Quarantine / Remediation Network Private Network NAC Server Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Guest Networks • A Guest Network provides limited network access for temporary guests. • Usually separated from an organization’s main network by: • VLAN • Separate Subnet • Separate network • Access Point function Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Edge vs Access Control • Edge Control: Protects the network at its outer boundary, usually with a Firewall. • Access Control: Protects individual resources inside the network using access control lists or other granular settings. Internet Firewall NAC Server Accounting Server w/ ACL Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. In 802.1x the device which is requesting authenticated access to the network is called the: 1 Authenticator Authentication server Network guest Supplicant Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. In 802.1x the device which is requesting authenticated access to the network is called the: The requesting device is the Supplicant, the access point or other device it is connecting to is the Authenticator, and the device verifying their credentials is the Authentication Server. d. Authenticator Authentication Server Network guest Supplicant 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. What is a characteristic that might cause a Posture Assessment to fail? 2 DNS settings Security Updates DHCP Settings Password Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. What is a characteristic that might cause a Posture Assessment to fail? A Posture Assessment will review security and software settings on the requesting device, which would include whether or not all relevant security updates are installed. • b DNS Settings Security Updates DHCP Settings Password 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Network Access Control refers to a system that allows organizations to restrict access to resources on their private network. • 802.1X is an IEEE Standard for authenticating devices attempting to access a LAN or WLAN and includes three components – a Supplicant, an Authenticator, and an Authentication Server. • Posture assessment is the evaluation of system security based on the applications and settings that a particular system is using. • When Posture Assessment is performed by an agent permanently installed on the user’s device it is referred to as a Persistent Agent. • Edge Control protects the outer boundary of a private network, while Access Control protects individual resources inside the network. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Forensic Concepts’. This concludes ‘Network Access Control’.