Introduction to Cyber Security Information Security Governance and Risk Assessment Learning Objectives Explain information security governance Describe risk management Summarize effective information security program By the end of this lesson, you will be able to: Define supply chain Information Security Governance Information Security Governance It is a set of responsibilities and practices exercised by the board and executive management to: Achieve goals Manage risks Meet objectives Verify usage of resources IT Governance Focus Areas IT Governance Risk Management Resource Management Performance Measures Strategic Alignment Value Delivery Business Goals and Objectives Strategic Plan Tactical Plan Operational Plan To meet customer needs by ensuring that business processes and operations are in place Business Drivers Market demands Organizational needs and brand image Technological advancement Customer requests Social needs Legal requirement Business Drivers Enabling Technology It is an invention or innovation that can be applied to drive radical change in the capabilities of a user or culture. Enablers for Governance Enablers are factors that individually and collectively influence whether something will work. Enabler Categories People, Skills, and Competencies Principles, Policies, and Frameworks Processes Services, Infrastructure, and Applications Culture, Ethics, and Behavior Information Security Governance Is the responsibility of the board of directors and executive management and must have a clear organizational strategy for preservation Information Security Governance: Outcomes The outcomes of information security governance are: Clear approval and support for formal security strategies Performance in implementing security policies is monitored Security awareness and training is provided Information security is treated as a critical business issue Professionalism demonstrated to third parties Information security effectiveness is reviewed periodically High level of oversight and control Implementation and maintenance of information security activities Management Support Management Support It is the extent to which the senior management understands the importance of the security function and supports security goals and priorities. Management Support Committing funding and resources Identifying key performance metrics Providing overall guidance Participating in security plans and policies Establish Reporting and Communication Channels Other management Senior management Employees Business process owners The user needs to have routine communication channels to: Performance Management and Smart Metric Performance Management It is the systematic process by which the Department of Commerce involves its employees as individuals and members of a group. Types of Performance management IT balanced scorecard Capability maturity model IT Balanced Scorecard It is a performance metric used in strategic management to identify and improve various internal functions of a business. Capability Maturity Model It is a methodology used to develop and refine an organization's software development process. SMART Metric A smart metric stands for specific, measurable, achievable or acceptable, realistic, and time specific or trackable. Time based Realistic Achievable Measurable Specific Risk Management Risk Management It is the process of identifying, assessing, monitoring, and controlling events arising from risks. Risk Management Risk cannot be removed but it can be minimized to an acceptable level. Risk Management Process Analyze: Assess the risk Action: Develop a risk management plan Monitor: Implement risk management actions Control: Reevaluate the risk Identify: Identify the risk Quantitative Risk Analysis It is a technique used to assess the effect of risk exposure events on overall organizational objectives. Quantitative Risk Analysis Calculates absolute financial values Assists in measuring the magnitude of impact Enables business to prioritize risks Quantitative Risk Analysis Uses different risk scenarios and ranks threats Is based on expert judgment, intuition, and experience Provides initial assessment to identify risks Considers organization culture, reputation, and brand image Ranks risks based on severity Risk Management Methods Risk Mitigation: Implement measures to eliminate vulnerabilities Risk Transfer: Transfer the risks to another entity Risk avoidance: Eliminate activities that involve risks Risk acceptance: Make decisions to live with the risks Risk Management methods are: Key Risk Indicator and Key Performance Indicator Metrics Measurement KPIs KRIs Performance Assessment Risk Assessment Analytics Decision Making Key Performance Indicator is a quantifiable metric that reflects how well an organization is achieving its stated goals and objectives. Key Risk Indicators are metrics used by organizations to provide an early signal of increasing risk exposure in various areas of the enterprise. Key Performance Indicator Measures the performance of security controls Provides a high-level overview of the past performance Key Risk Indicator Is selected for its impact on the senior leaders’ decisions Serves as an early warning indicator Risk IT Framework It is a framework based on a set of guiding principles featuring business processes and management guidelines. A mechanism to effectively evaluate strategies A strategy for minimizing the impact of risks A structured process to identify potential organization threats Risk IT Framework Risk IT Val IT Risk Management Value Management IT Process Management COBIT Identify Risk and Opportunity IT-related Events Complements COBIT Helps implement IT governance Risk IT Framework Risk Evaluation • Analyze risk • Collect data • Maintain risk profile Risk Response • Manage risks • Articulate risks • React to events Risk Governance • Define IT structure, roles, and responsibilities • Establish and maintain a common risk view • Make risk-aware business decisions Business Objectives Information Security Programs Information System (IS) Programs Information System Program Ensures that an organization’s information assets are protected Describes a complete organizational structure IS Programs Components Components of IS Programs are: Roles Process People IS Programs Objectives Implement IS strategy in a cost-effective manner Tackle issues during the execution Analyze security of current state against the desired state Develop key goal indicators to reflect objectives Develop methods to measure progress IS Program Charter Managers Sponsors Timeline Funding Program Objectives IS Management Framework: COBIT It helps the companies map their IT processes to ISACA’s best practices standard. Five Principles of COBIT The five principles of COBIT are: Applying a single integrated framework Meeting stakeholder needs Covering the enterprise end-to-end Separating governance from management Enabling a holistic approach IS Management Framework: ISO/IEC 27001:2013 This is an internationally recognized structure methodology dedicated to information security. A management process to evaluate, implement, and maintain an ISMS A comprehensive set of controls Emphasis on prevention 114 controls mapped to 14 security domains Applicable to all industry sectors ISO 27001:2013 Domains Security policies Organization of information security Human resources security Access control Cryptography Asset management Physical and environmental security ISO 27001:2013 Domains Operations security Communications security System acquisition, development, and maintenance Supplier relationships Information security incident management Compliance Information security aspects of business continuity management IS Program Roadmap • High-level plan • Architectural design • Milestones to achieve KGI, CSF, and KPI Security level of data, applications, systems, facilities, and processes • Analyze gaps • Identify areas with inadequate control objectives • Establish control points • Monitor controls Review current security levels Develop IS program roadmap Perform gap analysis Outcomes of IS Program Strategic alignment Risk management Performance management Business process assurance Resource management Value delivery specified either as a string containing a path to the build context Outcomes of IS Program Performance Management Risk Management Value Delivery Strategic alignment Resource Management • It determines the competitiveness of an organization. • It explains how organizations can increase growth and profitability. Business Process Assurance specified either as a string containing a path to the build context Outcomes of IS Program Performance Management Risk Management Value Delivery Strategic alignment Resource Management • Information security manager is responsible for information assets. • IS manager must understand threats to the organization, its vulnerabilities, and the risk profile. Business Process Assurance specified either as a string containing a path to the build context Outcomes of IS Program Performance Management Risk Management Value Delivery Strategic alignment Resource Management IS program must deliver the required level of security effectively and efficiently. Business Process Assurance specified either as a string containing a path to the build context Outcomes of IS Program Performance Management Risk Management Value Delivery Strategic alignment Resource Management • IS manager must use human technical knowledge and financial resources effectively. • Security practices and processes must be documented and consistent. • Security architecture is developed to define and utilize infrastructures. Business Process Assurance specified either as a string containing a path to the build context Outcomes of IS Program Performance Management Risk Management Value Delivery Strategic alignment Resource Management • It must develop monitoring process and metrics. • IS managers must seek independent assurance. Business Process Assurance specified either as a string containing a path to the build context Outcomes of IS Program Performance Management Risk Management Value Delivery Strategic alignment Resource Management IS manager must understand that IS is only a part of effective security. Business Process Assurance Supply Chain Supply Chain It is a system of organizations, people, activities, information, and resources involved in moving product to customer. Supply Chain Management (SCM) It is an expansive and complex undertaking that relies on each partner; from suppliers to manufacturers. Supply Chain Risk Management (SCRM) It is the implementation of strategies to manage both everyday and exceptional risks. Supply Chain Risks Compromised software or hardware purchased from suppliers Vulnerabilities in supply chain management or supplier systems Third-party service providers or vendors Poor Information Security practices by lower-tier suppliers Third-party data storage or data aggregators Counterfeit hardware or hardware with embedded malware The supply chain risks are: Supply Chain Countermeasures Presence of robust IT security solutions internally Compliance and governance Certification of international standards Supplier Management Controls It is the process whereby companies monitor and manage interactions with all external parties with which they have a relationship. Personnel Management Personnel Management It refers to planning, organizing, compensation, integration, and maintenance of people for the purpose of contributing to organizational, individual, and societal goals. Personnel Management Skills Responsibility Roles Organizational Culture Case Study: AWS Outage Problem Statement: In May 2017, Amazon faced a big A.W.S. outage that took down a bunch of large internet sites for several hours on a Tuesday afternoon. Case Study: AWS Outage Cause of the problem: In a blog post, the company said that one of its employees was debugging an issue with the billing system and accidentally took more servers offline than intended. That error started a domino effect that took down two other server subsystems and so on. Case Study: AWS Outage This case illustrates the importance of change management and internal governance in organizations. Common IS Program Challenges Inadequate management support Inadequate staffing Inadequate funding Key Takeaways Information security governance is the set of responsibilities and practices exercised by the board and executive management. Risk management is the process of identifying, assessing, monitoring, and controlling events arising from risks. The information security program consists of controls, processes, and practices to increase the resilience of the computing environment. Supply chain is a system of organizations, people, activities, information, and resources involved in moving a product to customer. Knowledge Check Knowledge Check a. b. c. d. Which of the following model describes a five-level evolutionary path of increasingly organized and systematically more mature processes? Measureable Initial Achievable Reliable 1 Knowledge Check The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which of the following model describes a five-level evolutionary path of increasingly organized and systematically more mature processes? 1 The model which describes a five-level evolutionary path of increasingly organized and systematically more mature processes is initial. b Measureable Initial Achievable Reliable Knowledge Check a. b. c. d. Which of the following is a system of organizations, people, activities, information, and resources involved in moving a product to customer? Supply chain management Supply chain risk management Supply chain Supplier management controls 2 Knowledge Check The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which of the following is a system of organizations, people, activities, information, and resources involved in moving a product to customer? 2 Supply chain is a system of organizations, people, activities, information, and resources involved in moving a product to customer. c Supply chain management Supply chain risk management Supply chain Supplier management controls Knowledge Check a. b. c. d. Which of the following are the components of IS Programs? Roles Skills Responsibility Process 3 Knowledge Check The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which of the following are the components of IS Programs? 3 The components of IS Programs are: Roles and Process. a and d Roles Skills Responsibility Process