Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 3: Security CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 3-1: Areas of Risk Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Describe the role of Disaster Recovery and Business Continuity in an organization’s risk assessment plan. • Identify an Uninterruptible Power Supply and describe its purpose. • Define a data breach. • Explain the risks associated with a single point of failure and ways to reduce that risk. • Identify the differences between vulnerability scanning and penetration testing. Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Risk • Risk is not unexpected. • Disasters can and will happen: • Equipment will fail • Lightning can strike • Power can go out • Fires and floods do happen • Theft and sabotage is possible Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Disaster Recovery / Business Continuity • Disaster Recovery (DR) is a set of policies, procedures and solutions to facilitate recovering from a disaster. • Consider how IT systems, including servers, data, and applications, can be restored after a fire, flood, theft, or equipment failure. • Business Continuity refers to activities and procedures to ensure critical business operations continue during and after a disaster. BDR devices such as the Datto Siris provide special Backup and Disaster Recovery solutions by backing up key servers and virtualizing server operations in case of hardware failure ! Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Battery Backups / UPS • Battery Backups or Uninterruptible Power Supplies (UPS) provide supplemental electricity to servers and other equipment during a power outage. • Battery Backups provide five to sixty minutes of power. • UPS software can notify administrators or automatically initiate shutdown processes. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Single Point of Failure • Single Point of Failure – A single device, connection, or service which will significantly impact network operations if it fails. • In Disaster Recovery planning, IT staff should identify: • Critical nodes – network devices or connections which will disrupt operations if they fail • Critical assets – resources such as servers or data storage locations which will disrupt business operations if they are unavailable • Wherever possible redundancy should be used to eliminate single points of failure in critical nodes or critical assets Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Vulnerability Scanning / Penetration Testing • Vulnerability scanner: A computer program designed to assess computers, computer systems, networks, or applications for weaknesses. • Nessus (paid) and Nmap (free) are two of the most popular vulnerability scanners. • Penetration test: An attack on a computer system with the intention of finding security weaknesses, potentially gaining access to it, its functionality, and data. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Responding to a Data Breach • Data breach – unauthorized access to network data, usually from outside the network. • First responders – the first person to identify a data breach or other unauthorized activity. IT staff should be trained in appropriate first responder techniques, including securing the crime scene as well as documenting and preserving evidence. • End user awareness and training – many data breaches occur due to end user errors, such as opening unexpected email attachments. Adhering to appropriate standards and policies related to acceptable behaviors should be part of end user training. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which of the following could be a single point of failure? 1 Collision Domain VLAN Switch UPS Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which of the following could be a single point of failure? A switch failure would leave all devices connected to that switch unable to function, therefore a switch is a single point of failure. c. Collision Domain VLAN Switch UPS 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which of the following can be a part of a Disaster Recovery plan? 2 UPS Business Continuity Port Mirroring Vulnerability Scanner Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which of the following can be a part of a Disaster Recovery plan? Business Continuity refers to activities and procedures to ensure critical business operations continue during and after a disaster. b. UPS Business Continuity Port Mirroring Vulnerability Scanner 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Disaster Recovery (DR) is a set of policies, procedures, and solutions to facilitate recovering from a disaster. • Business Continuity refers to activities and procedures to ensure critical business operations continue during and after a disaster. • A data breach is unauthorized access to network data, usually from outside the network. • Single Point of Failure is the term used to describe a single device, connection, or service which will significantly impact network operations if it fails. • A Vulnerability Scanner is a computer program designed to assess computers, computer systems, networks, or applications for weaknesses. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Attack Vectors’. This concludes ‘Areas of Risk’.