Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 3: Security CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 3-5: Firewalls Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Define a Firewall and its role in computer networks. • Distinguish between host-based, network-based, hardware, and software firewalls. • Explain the benefit of an application-aware firewall. • Describe the difference between stateful and stateless packet inspection. • Discuss the following terms: ACL, UTM, DMZ, Virtual Wire, and Implicit Deny. Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. About Firewalls • The name comes from construction, where a “firewall” is a wall especially designed to either prevent or delay a fire from penetrating into the next space. • Network firewalls are designed to prevent or delay outside intruders from penetrating into our network or resources. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Types of Firewalls • Host-based/software – firewall application designed to keep network intruders from accessing resources on that host. • Network-based/hardware – a physical device designed to keep intruders out of the local network or segment. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. SOHO Firewall • A small office/home office firewall is often integrated in one appliance which may also include: • Router • Wireless Access Point • Switch • File Sharing Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Application Aware Firewalls • Traditional Firewalls block traffic based on ports, IP addresses, or website content filter information. • “Next generation” or “Gen 3” application/context-aware firewalls can also block traffic based on specific applications or micro-applications (layer 7), user behavior, and reputation. • For example, a context-aware firewall can allow access to Facebook while blocking Facebook games. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Firewall Features • Stateless Packet Inspection – packets are reviewed individually and forwarded or dropped based solely on packet information (layer 3). • Fast, easy • Stateful Packet Inspection – packets are reviewed in the context of their TCP or UDP sessions. • Slower, requires maintaining state tables, less susceptible to spoofing and DoS attacks • UTM (Unified Threat Management) – provides additional functions in the same device, potentially including: • Network antivirus • Anti-spam • Intrusion Prevention • Content Filtering • VPN, load balancing, additional services Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Firewall Concepts • ACL – Access Control List, a table of IP addresses, MAC addresses, and/or ports and what they are allowed or not allowed to do. May reside on a firewall, router, or host. • DMZ – Demilitarized Zone, a designated IP or IP range that is specifically NOT protected by the firewall. Traffic to the DMZ is not filtered in any way. • Virtual Wire – a mode on certain firewalls or routers that directly maps an inbound and outbound port together as if they were one circuit. No routing takes place, but firewall filters still function on the virtual wire traffic. • Implicit Deny – the default on most firewalls, any traffic which is not specifically allowed in the firewall rules is automatically blocked. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Placement and Settings • Standard Firewall placement – • Between “trusted network” (internal) and “untrusted network” (external) • Filters inbound and outbound traffic based on rules to block or allow packets (layer 3) • Can also be used internally to limit access to sensitive areas of the internal network Company Network Firewall IDS Internet Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. A computer which is NOT protected by a firewall’s filters may be a part of a _______ . 1 Denial of Service attack Unified Threat Management Demilitarized Zone Application-aware firewall Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. A computer which is NOT protected by a firewall’s filters may be a part of a _______ . A Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) is an IP address or range, which is unprotected by the firewall. c. Denial of Service attack Unified Threat Management Demilitarized Zone Application-aware firewall 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. When a firewall inspects packets in the context of their TCP or UDP session, this is called _________ . 2 Stateful packet inspection Unified Threat Management Application-aware filtering. Implicit Deny Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. When a firewall inspects packets in the context of their TCP or UDP session, this is called _________ . In stateful packet inspection, packets are reviewed in the context of their TCP or UDP sessions. a. Stateful packet inspection Unified Threat Management Application-aware filtering Implicit Deny 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Network firewalls are designed to prevent or delay outside intruders from penetrating into our network or resources. • A host-based firewall is a software application designed to keep network intruders from accessing resources on that host. • A network-based firewall is usually a hardware appliance designed to keep intruders out of the local network or segment. • In stateful packet inspection, packets are reviewed in the context of their TCP or UDP sessions. • A DMZ is an IP or IP range which is not protected by the firewall. • Implicit Deny means that all traffic through a firewall is assumed to be blocked unless it is explicitly allowed by the firewall’s rules. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Network Access Control’. This concludes ‘Firewalls’.