Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 1: Network Theory and Architecture CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 1-6: Network Concepts Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. ● Describe the function of encapsulation and de-encapsulation. ● Discuss how segments, packets, frames, and bits work together. ● Describe multiplexing, demultiplexing, TDM, and FDM. ● Define baseband, broadband, bit rates, baud rates, and sampling size. ● Explain what collisions are and how CSMA/CD and CSMA/CA are used to mitigate collisions. ● Discuss the role of TCP, UDP, and ICMP. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. • Physical Layer: Bits • Data Link Layer: Frames • Network Layer: Packets or Datagrams • Transport Layer: Segments • How do these relate to each other? Recap: OSI Model 1 - Physical 2 - Data Link 3 - Network 4 - Transport 5 - Session 6 - Presentation 7 -Application Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. • Encapsulation (in networking) means designing communications in modular protocols, so that logically separate functions can be communicated by including or encapsulating information inside higher level objects. Encapsulation and De-Encapsulation THING THING Encapsulated THING De-Encapsulated Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. • Physical Layer (Layer 1) sends Bits (1s and 0s): • For convenience, these are grouped into 8-bits each, called Octets (or Bytes) Encapsulation and De-Encapsulation (contd.) 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. • Scenario: An application on a network device needs to send data to another device on a TCP/IP network. • At the Transport Layer, Layer 4, the data is Encapsulated in a TCP Segment: The Header Data includes important information about the size, destination port, urgency of the data, and a sequence number. • Combined TCP Header and Data form a TCP Segment, which is passed to layer 3 for continued processing. Creating a TCP Segment TCP Header Data Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The new TCP Segment: At Layer 3, the Network Layer, IP information must be added, so the segment(s) will reach their destination. Each segment is encapsulated into an IP Packet: TCP Header Segment to Packet Data IP Header Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. This IP Packet: Then arrives at the data link layer, Layer 2, to be encapsulated again as a Frame. Frames are often smaller than packets, meaning one packet must be broken into multiple frames. Packet to Frame IP Header Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. • Final Ethernet Frame: • This is transmitted as 1s and 0s by the Physical Layer, Layer 1. The Ethernet Frame Preamble, Frame Delimiter, MAC Destination, MAC Source, 802.1Q tag, Ethertype Payload (portion of the Packet): . Frame Check Sequence (CRC) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Encapsulation and De-Encapsulation Summary: Data Is Encapsulated into a Segment: TCP Header Data IP Header Which is Encapsulated into a Packet Which is Encapsulated into one or more Frames Preamble, Frame Delimiter, MAC Destination, MAC Source, 802.1Q tag, Ethertype Payload (portion of the Segment): . Frame Check Sequence (CRC) DATA (Layer 5+) SEGMENT (Layer 4) PACKET (Layer 3) FRAME (Layer 2) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. • On the receiving device, the process is reversed (“De-Encapsulation”): De-Encapsulation Preamble, Frame Delimiter, MAC Destination, MAC Source, 802.1Q tag, Ethertype Payload (portion of the Packet): Frame Check Sequence (CRC) Data IP Header TCP Header Data Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. OSI / Encapsulation Summary • Layer 4, Transport, encapsulates data as Segments • Layer 3, Network, encapsulates Segments as Packets • Layer 2, Data Link, encapsulates and splits Packets into Frames • Layer 1, Physical, transmits Frames as Bits. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. TCP/IP Suite • IP (Internet Protocol): Deliver packets based on IP Addresses • TCP (Transmission Control Protocol): Connection- oriented protocol which provides reliable, ordered, error-checked Segments in conjunction with IP • UDP (User Datagram Protocol): Connectionless protocol, able to send Datagrams (similar to Segments) faster than TCP, but with no guarantee of delivery or sequence. • ICMP (Internet Control Message Protocol): Used by network devices to send error messages such as host unreachable or service unavailable. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. TCP/IP Suite (contd.) • Other Services: • DHCP • DNS • PPP • ARP • IP: Two versions, IPv4 and IPv6 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Modulation Techniques • Multiplexing: Combining multiple communication streams onto one physical media. • De-Multiplexing: Reconstituting mutiplexed communication streams from one physical media. • Multiplexing can be Analog or Digital Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Modulation Techniques ( contd.) • Time-Division Multiplexing (TDM): Transmitting multiple data signals via a synchronized physical link, so that each signal appears on the link for a fraction of time. • Frequency-Division Multiplexing (FDM): Transmitting multiple data signals over a physical link by allocating a specific frequency range to each signal. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Modulation Techniques (contd.) • Time-Division Multiplexing (TDM): •Frequency-Division Multiplexing (FDM) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Binary 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 128 64 32 16 8 4 2 1 Numbering Systems • Decimal: 0 through 9 • Binary: 0 or 1 • Hexadecimal: 0 through F • Octal: 0 through 7 • The charts to the right express the number “46” (decimal) in the different numbering systems Hexadecimal 0 0 0 2 E 65,536 4096 256 16 1 Octal 0 0 0 5 6 4096 512 64 8 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Baseband vs Broadband • Baseband: When all the bandwidth of a physical media is used by one signal. • Ethernet is a baseband technology, e.g. “100baseT” • Broadband: When the bandwidth of a physical media is shared by multiple signals. • Example: Cable or DSL-based internet service Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Bitrate vs Baud rate • Baud Rate: In the 1970s and 1980s, the speed of telephone modems was expressed as Baud Rate • Named for French engineer Jean-Maurice-Emily Baudot • Measures electronic state changes per second: 1200 baud = 1200 voltage changes on a physical line in one second. • Originally Baud rate = Bitrate. • The term became unclear when modems began transmitting multiple bits per state change. • Bit Rate: The number of bits transmitted per second. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Sampling Size • When converting analog to digital or vice-versa, the Sampling Size determines the number of times the analog signal is measured at regular intervals. • Higher Sampling Size yields a more precise measurement and more accurate data. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Wavelength • The Wavelength of a signal is the measurement of the spatial period of the wave – the distance between the repetitions of the wave. • Wavelength in networking most commonly applies to: • Fiber Optic cabling, where data is transmitted as wavelengths of light. • Wireless networks, where data is transmitted as wavelengths on a radio frequency. wavelength Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Collisions • Collision: When multiple devices share one physical medium, and two or more devices attempt to transmit at the same time. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Collisions (contd.) • Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) is the method which Ethernet and other wired technologies use to minimize Collisions and their associated problems. • Host checks for the presence of another signal before and during transmission • If another transmission is detected, Host broadcasts a jam signal to alert all devices to the collision. • Host waits for a randomly generated amount of time, then attempts retransmission. • Also referred to as CDMA/CD for “Carrier Detect Multiple Access”, though CDMA is also an unrelated WAN technology. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Collisions (contd.) • Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance (CSMA/CA) is an alternative to CSMA/CD. • Superior to CSMA/CD on Wireless Networks because: • Wireless devices cannot easily detect signals while they are transmitting • Wireless devices may communicate with an Access Point but not be able to receive transmissions from other devices connected to the same Access Point (the “Hidden Node” problem). Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Collisions (contd.) • In CSMA/CA: • A node listens to the shared medium to determine when the medium is not in use by other nodes. (Note – this may be inaccurate due to “Hidden Nodes”) • The node then sends an RTS, “Request To Send” signal to the Access Point (or receiver). • If clear, the Access Point will issue a CTS, “Clear To Send” signal back to the requesting node. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Collisions (contd.) • The node then sends an entire Frame, and waits for the Access Point to acknowledge correct receipt of the Frame. • If no acknowledgement is received, the node assumes a collision has occurred, waits for an exponentially- increasing backoff period, then tries again. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Quiz Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Combining multiple communication streams onto one physical media is called ___________ . 1 Encapsulation Encryption Translation Multiplexing Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Combining multiple communication streams onto one physical media is called ___________ . Multiplexing is combining multiple communication streams onto one physical media. d. Encapsulation Encryption Translation Multiplexing 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. The number "f3f0" is an example of what numbering system? 2 Decimal Octal Hexadecimal Dotted-Decimal Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. The number "f3f0" is an example of what numbering system? Octal uses digits 0-7, Decimal uses digits 0-9, only Hexadecimal uses digits 0-f. So, this is a Hexadecimal number. c. Decimal Octal Hexadecimal Dotted-Decimal 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. What is reduced by using the method CSMA/CD? 3 Collisions Multiplexing Encapsulation Bottlenecks Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. What is reduced by using the method CSMA/CD? Carrier Sense Multiple Access / Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) is a method to reduce collisions on a network. a. Collisions Multiplexing Encapsulation Bottlenecks 3 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Encapsulation (in networking) means designing communications in modular protocols, so that logically separate functions can be communicated by including or encapsulating information inside higher level objects. • TCP (Transmission Control Protocol): Connection-oriented protocol which provides reliable, ordered, error-checked Segments in conjunction with IP. • UDP (User Datagram Protocol): Connectionless protocol, able to send Datagrams (similar to Segments) faster than TCP, but with no guarantee of delivery or sequence. • Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) is the method that Ethernet and other wired technologies use to minimize Collisions and their associated problems. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn, All rights reserved. This concludes ‘Basic Network Concepts’ The next lesson is ‘Wired Connections’