Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 2: Operations CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 2-4: Network Segmentation Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Define network segmentation. • Discuss how performance optimization, security, compliance, and compatibility can benefit from network segmentation. • Explain why SCADA systems, legacy systems, and public networks should be segmented. • Describe honeypots and honeynets. Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Network Segmentation Large networks are often separated by switches, routers, or bridges into segments. Each segment is its own collision domain: • CSMA/CD functions only within the local segment. • Traffic identified as being on the local segment is not transmitted outside of the segment. • Broadcast traffic without a specific destination and traffic whose destination is not within the local segment will be transmitted outside the segment. • If a router is used to separate the segment, then broadcast traffic will remain within the segment as well (broadcast domain segmentation). Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Network Segmentation (contd.) There are three reasons for segmenting a network: 1. Performance Optimization – segmenting local traffic and CSMA/CD requests reduces traffic across the rest of the network (especially in Medianets) and potentially contains problems (e.g. jabber). • Load Balancing – part of Performance, load balancing refers to adjusting equipment to prevent overloading any one component such as a router or switch. Segmenting networks can be a big part of load balancing. 2. Security – restricting data flow to local segments makes it harder for hackers to access other parts of the network. • Compliance – part of Security, when data is subject to specific compliance regulations, particularly finance or privacy related, segmenting that data makes compliance and compliance reporting easier. 3. Compatibility – some network segments may use incompatible technologies. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Networks That Should Be Segmented • SCADA (Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition) – used in industrial settings, SCADA networks control industrial equipment. To prevent interference with machine operation, SCADA networks should be segmented from other general networks. • Legacy Systems – Legacy computer systems are not uncommon in business. These are often outdated and insecure, but still required to manage one or more business-critical applications. Because they lack modern antivirus and security settings, legacy systems should be segmented. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Networks That Should Be Segmented (contd.) • Public/Private networks – Many organizations offer a “guest” network to allow visitors access to the Internet and perhaps less confidential areas of their main network. The public, guest network should be its own segment. • Testing Labs – Testing labs may include secure subnets where developers test new software or IT consultants prepare new equipment or test potentially infected equipment. • Medianets – The high bandwidth demands of audio and video traveling on a medianet will almost always have negative effects on the rest of the network if they are not placed on their own segment. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Honeypots and Honeynets • Honeypots are computers designed to be attractive to intruders. The goal is for intruders to focus their attention on one or more honeypots rather than the organization’s real data. • Honeynets are entire network segments constructed as an attractive target for outside intruders. • Honeypots and Honeynets should obviously be segmented from the rest of the network, with appropriate coverage by Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS). Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. How can network segmentation be used to enforce role policies? 1 Creating a separate segment for a guest network. Creating a separate segment for legacy computers. Using a router to create separate segments for HR and finance departments. Using a switch to create multiple collision domains. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. How can network segmentation be used to enforce role policies? All are valid uses of segmentation, but using a router to create separate segments for different departments can limit user access to their local department. c. Creating a separate segment for a guest network. Creating a separate segment for legacy computers. Using a router to create separate segments for HR and finance departments. Using a switch to create multiple collision domains. 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Creating a separate broadcast domain requires a ____________ . 2 Segment Router Collision Domain Switch Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Creating a separate broadcast domain requires a ____________ . Broadcast domains are separated by Routers. b. Segment Router Collision Domain Switch 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Large networks are often separated by switches, routers, or bridges into segments. • Reasons why a network might benefit from segmentation include performance optimization, load balancing, security, compliance, and compatibility. • Specific network types that are usually segmented include SCADA, legacy systems, public networks, testing labs, and medianets. • Honeypots are computers designed to be attractive to intruders. Honeynets are entire network segments constructed as an attractive target for outside intruders. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Patches and Updates’. This concludes ‘Network Segmentation’.