Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 1: Network Theory and Architecture CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 1-4: WAN Technologies Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. ● Explain the characteristics and benefits of various WAN technologies, including Dialup, DSL, Broadband Cable, ISDN, T-Series, Metro-E, and Satellite. ● Discuss the differences between ADSL and SDSL. ● Explain the difference between Frequency Division Multiplexing and Time Division Multiplexing. ● Describe the basic characteristics of SONET, MPLS, ATM, Frame Relay, and Wireless WAN circuits. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. WAN Technologies WAN: Wide Area Network is often the network your Internet Service Provider uses to connect your LAN to the Internet. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Fiber vs. Copper vs. Wireless A WAN can be delivered many ways, which may include traditional copper cabling, fiber optic cabling, wireless solutions, or a combination. The type of media used may be based on these factors: ● Signal Attenuation/Degradation: The longer the distance a signal travels, the weaker it becomes. The maximum range for a copper DSL circuit is 5.5km while a fiber SONET circuit can travel up to 15km. ● Cost: Generally fiber optic cabling is the most expensive and most difficult to install. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Multiplexing, Time or Frequency • Multiplexing is a procedure for transmitting many signals on the same connection. The combined signals are demultiplexed on the receiving side. • Frequency Division Multiplexing (FDM) sends each individual signal within a non-overlapping frequency sub-band on the communications medium. • Time Division Multiplexing (TDM) chops each individual signal into discrete chunks, which are transmitted over a synchronized connection. Each chunk uses the connection for a fraction of time. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. WAN Technologies - Dialup ● Maximum speed 56Kbps ● Generally obsolete except in rural areas ● Uses a Modem and an analog phone line, often referred to as either: o PSTN—Public Switched Telephone Network o POTS―Plain Old Telephone Service Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. WAN Technologies - ISDN ISDN • Consists of 2 or more Bearer channels (“B channels”) capable of carrying 64kbps each, plus one Data channel (“D channel”) at 16kbps. • PRI-ISDN consists of 30 B channels for a total bonded bandwidth of 1920kbps. • BRI-ISDN, most common in North America, uses 2 B channels for a total bonded bandwidth of 128kbps. • Often used for video conferencing systems and phone service, less often for Internet connections. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. DSL • “Digital Subscriber Line” • DSL allows high speed data transmission over short distances using ordinary 2-wire telephone cabling. • Because DSL uses frequencies outside of those used for voice traffic, it does not interfere with normal phone calls on the same cable. • DSL circuits must connect to a Digital Subscriber Line Access Multiplexer (“DSLAM”) within approximately 18,000 feet (5.5 km). WAN Technologies - DSL Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. • ADSL • ADSL or Asynchronous DSL has a faster download speed than its upload speed. • ADSL speeds are often written as Upload/Download. E.g. “768/128” indicates an ADSL connection with a 768kbps download speed and 128kbps upload speed. • SDSL • Synchronous DSL: upload speeds and download speeds are identical DSL Types Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Broadband Internet Service uses coaxial cable, generally the same cable used for TV service. • Compared with DSL, Broadband Cable is generally faster but can have higher Latency. • Broadband Cable users share bandwidth with all other users on their local loop. • (DSL users share bandwidth at the shared DSLAM). WAN Technologies – Broadband Cable Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. WAN Technologies - Satellite Satellite • Satellite is an option for Internet (and other) connectivity in areas not served by other broadband options. • Satellite speeds have improved but satellite broadband is generally slower than DSL or Cable. • Satellite suffers from extremely high latency – not surprising since transmissions must go into space and back! Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. WAN Technologies – T-Series and E-Series T-Series and E-Series • T-1 is a type of “leased line” phone and data circuit provided by phone companies in North America. • Originally built for combining multiple voice lines on one circuit, T1s combine 24 64k channels (DS0). • Each channel can carry an analog voice call or be used for data. • 24 channels of 64kbps each *should* yield bandwidth of 1.536 Mbps, however a full T1 bandwidth is 1.544 Mbps due to one extra frame bit sent for synchronization after every 192-bit frame. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. T-Series and E-Series • T-2 and T-3 are larger versions of the T-1. • T-2 is very uncommon, but T-3 is the equivalent of 28 T-1s, with total bandwidth of 44.736 Mbps. • Together, T-1s and similar circuits are referred to as the T-Series. • In Europe a very similar standard is the E-Series. • E-1 connections use thirty-two 64k channels for a total bandwidth of 2.048 Mbps. • The E-3 connection can reach speeds of 34.368Mbps, the equivalent of 16 E-1s. WAN Technologies – T-Series and E-Series (contd.) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. T-Series and E-Series • Despite being slower and often much more expensive than ADSL or Cable connections, T-1 circuits are still very common in businesses for three reasons: • Reliability – T-1 circuits often have very strong Service Level Agreements (SLAs) from the provider, guaranteeing uptime, bandwidth, latency, and packet loss. • Speed – Despite being slower than most DSL or Cable circuits, T-1s are dedicated circuits, not shared with other customers on the local loop (cable) or at the DSLAM (DSL). • Suitability – While modern phone systems may work with IP-based telephone services, many legacy phone systems are designed to work with PRI interfaces (provisioned through a T-1 or ISDN) or single analog lines (PSTN). WAN Technologies – T-Series and E-Series (contd.) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Metro Ethernet (Metro-E) • A WAN technology using plain Ethernet. • Not widely available, but often faster and less expensive than comparable broadband offerings when available. • Often designed as Ethernet to MPLS then back to Ethernet on the remote side. WAN Technologies – Metro E Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. WAN Technologies – SONET/SDH SONET/SDH • Synchronous Optical NETwork (US) or Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (International) • Standard for Synchronous data transmission over fiber optic cables • The SONET basic data rate is 51.84Mbps, called the Optical Carrier Level or OC. • Fiber optic speeds are measured in multiples of OC: • OC-3 = 155.52 Mbps • OC-12 = 622.08 Mbps Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM) • WDM is a technique for multiplexing multiple OC signals on a single fiber by using separate wavelengths of light for each. • Individual signals are multiplexed onto the carrier fiber, then demultiplexed back into the original signals at the other end. • This allows network carriers to effectively add more optical “circuits” without the necessity of adding additional lines. • Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM) is highly efficient, with more than 8 active wavelengths per fiber. • Coarse Wavelength Division Mutiplexing (CWDM) is less efficient, with fewer than 8 active wavelengths per fiber, but is considerably less expensive compared to DWDM. WAN Technologies - WDM Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Frame Relay • A packet switched technology that allows different customers to use the same network at the same time using individual virtual circuits (Permanent or PVC) or (Switched or SVC). • A portion of the available bandwidth is guaranteed to each user, but additional bandwidth can be used if available. • Committed Information Rate (CIR): The maximum bandwidth guaranteed for a particular user. • Access Rate: The maximum speed the Frame Relay interface can transmit. WAN Technologies – Frame Relay Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. MPLS • Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) is a mechanism to route packets through a large network based on short path labels rather than network addresses. • MPLS works with any protocol (TCP, UDP, etc.) • MPLS can work over most communication technologies, including DSL, T1, ATM, Frame Relay, and IP. • MPLS can improve network traffic by minimizing routing – nodes within the MPLS cloud transfer packets based on their short path label rather than having to perform a routing lookup. • Because MPLS serves some functions at OSI layer 2 and layer 3, it’s considered a “Layer 2.5” technology. WAN Technologies - MPLS Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. WAN Technologies - PPP PPP (Point-to-Point Protocol) • PPP is a Data Link protocol used to establish a direct connection between two nodes. • PPP works over dialup, serial cables, ISDN & T1 circuits, or SONET. • PPP-over-Ethernet or PPPoE is often used with DSL connections. • Multilink PPP bonds the underlying physical connections into one virtual pipe, so that three T1 connections at the Physical Layer are seen as a single 4.5Mbps path to a Layer 3 router. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. ATM • Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM): a communications standard designed in the 1980’s to accommodate both high throughput transmissions, such as file downloads, and real-time, low- latency content such as voice calls or video conferencing. • Uses elements of both Circuit Switching and Packet Switching: • Transmits small, fixed-size “cells” (similar to packets) using Time Division Multiplexing. • Establishes a virtual circuit which is either fully dedicated (permanent) or switched. • Being replaced by IP-only Networks WAN Technologies - ATM Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Circuit Switching vs Packet Switching • Circuit Switching: implementing a network connection via a dedicated communications channel. • For the duration of the communication session, the circuit is 100% dedicated to the network connection. • Traditional Analog phone calls are circuit-switched connections. • Packet Switching: transmitting multiple network connections over a single medium. • Each communications steam is broken into packets, with appropriate header information to be delivered properly on the other end of the medium. • The Internet is a packet-switched network. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. WAN Technologies - Wireless Wireless WANs • Wireless WAN connections via mobile phone networks are becoming more affordable and popular • Cellular Generations: • Marketing based, no clear standards until 3G • 1G: First Generation, Voice-only • 2G: Second Generation, up to 1Mbps data rate (1x) • 3G: Third Generation, up to 28MBps in theory but closer to 2Mbps in actual use • 4G: Fourth Generation, up to 300Mbps, with future versions planned for up to 1Gbps Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Wireless WANs • GSM: Global System for Mobile Communications – the default global standard for 2G and 3G Cellular Communications • EDGE: Enhanced Data Rates for GSM Evolution – an enhanced technology to improve data speeds on 2G and 3G GSM networks • HSPA+: High Speed Packet Access – often called “3.5G”, provides higher data rates on GSM networks • CDMA: Code Division Multiple Access, also called IS-95, is an alternate communications standard to GSM, used by North American mobile phone providers including Verizon and Sprint. • LTE: Long Term Evolution, also called 4G LTE. LTE has become the dominant standard for 4G mobile phone networks, supplanting one-time alternative WiMax. WAN Technologies – Wireless (contd.) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Quiz Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which protocol uses label switching to determine routing? 1 PPP MPLS Circuit Switching ATM Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which protocol uses label switching to determine routing? MPLS or Multiprotocol Label Switching routes packets through a WAN using short path labels. b. PPP MPLS Circuit Switching ATM 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. A packet switched technology that allows different customers to use the same network at the same time is ______. 2 ATM Circuit Switching Dial-Up Frame Relay Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. A packet switched technology that allows different customers to use the same network at the same time is ______. Frame Relay is a packet switched technology that allows different customers to use the same network at the same time using individual virtual circuits. d. ATM Circuit Switching Dial-Up Frame Relay 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which of the following WAN technologies has the fastest bandwidth? 3 OC3 ISDN T-1 3G Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which of the following WAN technologies has the fastest bandwidth? OC3 connections have a bandwidth of 155.52Mbps compared with 1.544 for a T-1, 1920k for PRI-ISDN and a theoretical 28Mbps for 3G. a. OC3 ISDN T-1 3G 3 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary ● Frequency Division Multiplexing (FDM) sends each individual signal within a non-overlapping frequency sub-band on the communications medium. ● Time Division Multiplexing (TDM) chops each individual signal into discrete chunks which are transmitted over a synchronized connection. Each chunk uses the connection for a fraction of time. ● BRI-ISDN, most common in North America, uses 2 B channels for a total bonded bandwidth of 128kbps. ● DSL allows high speed data transmission over short distances using ordinary 2-wire telephone cabling. ● T-1 is a type of “leased line” phone and data circuit provided by phone companies in North America. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn, All rights reserved. This concludes ‘WAN Technologies’ The next lesson is ‘Network Devices’