Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 4: Trouble Shooting CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 4-2: Troubleshooting Tools Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Discuss the use of ipconfig, nbstat, nslookup, and arp command line utilities. • Differentiate between ping and ping6. • Explain the benefits of using pathping over tracert. • Define line testers, multimeters, and toner probes and discuss their use in network troubleshooting. • List various diagnostic websites. • Explain the function of a looking glass site. Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Troubleshooting Tools • Your best tools for troubleshooting will always be your own eyes, hands, and brain. • Other tools, both software and hardware, are essential to provide information and verify troubleshooting theories. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Command Line Tools • ipconfig – displays current TCP/IP address, subnet, gateway, and other information • ipconfig /all – displays information for all local network interfaces Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Command Line Tools (contd.) • netstat – displays current network connection statistics and information Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Command Line Tools (contd.) • ifconfig – used on Unix-based systems, including Mac OSX, to display or configure TCP/IP network interface parameters. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Command Line Tools (contd.) • Ping tests to see if a given machine or address is accessible • Ping <address> or Ping <machinename> sends an ICMP packet to the designated address or machine name and returns a response if found. • Ping6 is similar to ping for IPv6 networks • Ping -6 is needed to ping a machine name (not an address) on some systems Note: ping continues indefinitely until you enter Ctrl+C Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Command Line Tools (contd.) • tracert is similar to ping but returns a response from each router or device (“hop”) between the source and destination machines. • “tracert” on Windows machines; “traceroute” on Linux/OSX machines • Also has tracert6 and tracert -6 options similar to Ping. o ping/ping6/ping -6 o tracert/tracert -6/traceroute6/traceroute -6 • pathping combines the functionality of both ping and tracert, displaying statistics about each node between your device and the destination over time. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Command Line Tools (contd.) • nbtstat – used on Windows machines to show information from the NetBIOS cache • nslookup – used to display information from DNS servers (“name server lookup”) • arp – used to display the arp cache on the local machine • “arp –hostname” displays the known IP and MAC address of the host if known • “arp –a” displays all contents of the arp cache Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. MAC Address Lookup • Using a command line tool like “arp” may show you the MAC address of a connected device. • How can you tell what sort of device that is? By using a MAC address lookup table. • Websites that offer free MAC address lookup services include: • Whatsmyip.org • Wireshark.org • Macvendors.com Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Physical Tools • Line testers • Include tools that simply check continuity as well as tools that verify correct pin connections • Also known as cable testers • Certifiers • Include line testing but also certifies the line conditions to meet Category 3, 5, 5e, etc. requirements. • Multimeter • Measures electrical resistance, voltage, and current. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Physical Tools (contd.) • Light meter (aka Optical Power Meter) – measures the power level output from a fiber optic connection. • Toner probe – used to trace wires through a building, a toner probe works by attaching a transmitter (“tone generator”) to the wire on one end and using a probe to detect the transmitted tone from the other end. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Diagnostic Websites • IP Checkers – provide your IP information and some basic connection tests • ipchicken.com, whatsmyip.com • DNS checks – check DNS records for a domain • mxtoolbox.com, dnsstuff.com • Speed test sites – measure the speed of your Internet connection • speedtest.net Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Diagnostic Websites • Looking glass sites – provide limited insight into a company’s router and Internet connections through tools like ping, tracert, and routing statistics. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Analyzers • Wi-Fi analyzer • device (or smartphone app) which provides details about nearby WLANS, including channel usage. • Protocol analyzer (aka packet analyzer/sniffer) • a device which intercepts and logs packet data to detect and analyze network problems Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Quiz Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which command line tool can display your IP address and subnet information? 1 ping tracert pathping ipconfig Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which command line tool can display your IP address and subnet information? ipconfig displays the local device's IP address and subnet information. d. ping tracert pathping ipconfig 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which tool can be used to trace wiring in a building? 2 Light meter Cable certifier Toner Probe Wi-Fi Analyzer Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which tool can be used to trace wiring in a building? A Toner Probe is used to trace wires in a building. c. Light meter Cable certifier Toner Probe Wi-Fi Analyzer 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • IPconfig is a command-line tool which displays the current TCP/IP address, subnet, gateway, and related information. • Ping and Ping6 send an ICMP packet to the designated address or machine name and returns a response if found. • A toner probe is used to trace wires through a building by attaching a transmitter (“tone generator”) to the wire on one end and using a probe to detect the transmitted tone from the other end. • Looking glass sites provide limited insight into a company’s router and Internet connections through tools like ping, tracert, and routing statistics. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Troubleshooting Wireless Issues’. This concludes ‘Troubleshooting Tools’.