Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 1: Network Theory and Architecture CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 1-10 Network Services and Applications Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. ● Describe a network controller ● Explain the use of a VPN and the three types of VPN ● Describe the IPsec, GRE, SSL VPN, and PTP/PPTP VPN protocols ● Discuss the difference between TACACS and RADIUS authentication protocols ● Explain Remote Access Services ● Describe the networking challenges of unified voice services After completing this lesson, you will be able to: Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. • The interface between a device and a network is called a Network Controller. • In a computer this is often referred to as the Network Interface Card or NIC. • Common wired NICs use the Ethernet standard and support 10Mbps, 100Mbps, or 1000Mbps (1Gbps) connections. • The interface between a device and a wireless network is sometimes referred to as a Wireless Network Interface Controller or WNIC. Network Controllers Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. VPN • A Virtual Private Network (VPN) establishes a secure, private connection between two devices or two networks, through a public, unsecured network. • Example: An employee who needs access to sensitive company information while traveling may use a VPN to securely connect their laptop to the company network via the Internet. • VPNs may be used for: • Security • Avoiding censorship or filters by connecting to an outside host • Hiding one’s identity by connecting through proxy servers. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Three Types of VPNs • There are three types of VPNs-- • Host-to-Host: One device connects securely to another device • Host-to-Site: One device connects securely to another network, such as a traveling employee establishing a VPN back to their office network. • Site-to-Site: Two or more networks connected via VPN, functioning as if they are the same network. • Site-to-Site VPN connections are usually established by the routers or firewalls at each location. This is a popular solution for companies with more than one physical location, and need to share data as if they are on the same network. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. VPN Protocols • VPNs use specific protocols to establish the connection and route traffic through the VPN. • Because VPN connections are referred to as “Tunnels” these are often referred to as “tunneling protocols”. • IPsec – Internet Protocol Security, authenticates and encrypts IP packets at the Network Layer of the OSI model • GRE – Generic Routing Encapsulation, encapsulates many network protocols into one tunnel. • SSL VPN – Secure Sockets Layer, a popular Internet encryption protocol, can be used to create a VPN • PTP/PPTP – Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol is an older VPN method combining GRE with PPP (Point to Point Protocol, also called PTP) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Authentication Protocols • Security is paramount on any network, so services must be designated to handle user authentication, authorization, and accounting (AAA). Two popular authentication protocols are: • RADIUS – Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service, the most popular AAA protocol used by ISPs, servers, firewalls, etc. • TACACS – Terminal Access Controller Access-Control Systems, an old AAA developed in 1984 and generally superseded by RADIUS or by TACACS+, an enhanced version of TACACS created by Cisco. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Remote Access Service (RAS) • Remote Access Service (RAS) is a general term, referring to any combination of hardware and software which allows a user to remotely access a computer. • Originally used with Windows NT which had built-in remote access tools called RAS and allowed remote access via a telephone modem. • Today, RAS can refer to Windows’ built-in services such as Remote Desktop as well as 3rd party services, like: LogMeIn, TeamViewer, and DameWare. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Web Services • Web Services are communication channels over the Internet (or, less often, a company’s internal intranet). • Web services communicate using languages such as XML, REST, and SOAP • Secure connections to Web Services are often made using HTTPS (Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Unified Voice Services • Networks carry more than just data today – VoIP phone systems, video streaming, videoconferencing, and instant message systems represent a new challenge for network designers and troubleshooters. • Taken together these voice, video, and messaging systems are referred to as Unified Voice Services. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Challenges with Unified Voice Services, Part 1 • Two issues must be addressed to ensure a good user experience using Unified Voice Services: 1. Latency – latency refers to the delay in delivering packets between nodes. In data transfer occasional latency is not a problem, but in voice communication latency can distort or garble voice and video streams or prevent communication altogether. Implementing the QoS protocol as a method to prioritize packets can help to address latency issues. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Challenges with Unified Voice Services, Part 2 2. Bandwidth – video streaming and videoconferencing can use considerably more bandwidth than normal data transfer. Increasing network bandwidth capacity (by using faster switches and routers or upgrading to a faster WAN connection) can address bandwidth concerns. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Quiz Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. The interface between a device and a network is called a _________. 1 port protocol network controller server Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. The interface between a device and a network is called a _________. A network controller is the interface between a device and a network. c. port protocol network controller server 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Establishing a secure, private connection between two devices can be done with a ______. 2 router WAN network controller VPN Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Establishing a secure, private connection between two devices can be done with a ______. A VPN can establish a secure, private connection between two devices. d. router WAN network controller VPN 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary ● The interface between a device and a network is called a Network Controller. ● A Virtual Private Network (VPN) establishes a secure, private connection between two devices or two networks, through a public, unsecured network. ● Four popular VPN protocols are IPsec, GRE, SSL VPN, and PTP/PPTP. ● RADIUS, the Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service, is the most popular AAA (Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting) protocol used by ISPs, servers, and firewalls. ● The two major networking challenges with unified voice services are bandwidth and latency. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn, All rights reserved. This concludes ‘Network Services and Applications’ The next lesson is ‘DHCP and DNS’