Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 2: Operations CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 2-1: Monitoring Tools Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: ● Describe the importance of Network Monitoring Tools ● Explain the function of a Packet Analyzer ● Discuss the uses of a Port Scanner ● Explain SNMP and its role in network monitoring ● Differentiate between Packet Sniffing and Packet Flow Monitoring ● Explain the importance of Temperature, Humidity, and Power Monitoring ● Describe the function of Wireless Survey Tools and Wireless Analyzers Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Things You CAN See There are some things you can see with your eyes on a network, like: • Disconnected cables • The IP address in a configuration window • Link Indicator lights • Smoke, fire, and physical damage Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Things You CAN’T See • Network activity • Outside hackers snooping through your files • Unusual network traffic • Network bottlenecks • Security vulnerabilities Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Monitoring Tools Network monitoring tools give you insight into what is really happening on your network. These can include: • Packet Sniffers (aka Packet or Network Analyzers) • Port Scanners • Interface Monitoring Tools • SNMP Management Tools • Power and Environmental Monitoring Tools • Wireless Survey and Analyzer Tools Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Packet Sniffers Packet Sniffers (aka Packet Analyzers or Network Analyzers) provide insight into packets on the local network. • Sniffers work by capturing all packets transmitted across the network interface • Promiscuous Mode allows the capture of all packets, not just ones sent to or from the local machine (if supported) • Packet Sniffer programs are limited to traffic on the local segment • Packet Sniffer devices can intercept packets in other segments (e.g. between the router and firewall) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Packet Sniffers (contd.) • Captured packets can include just header information or the entire packet • Decoded header info can be useful to identify: • Network problems • Intrusion attempts • Network misuse • Top Talkers (devices that send the most) • Top Listeners (devices that receive the most) Common Packet Sniffer applications include Wireshark, NetMon, and Packet Peeper ! Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Packet Flow Monitoring • Cisco routers and some independent tools use a function called NetFlow to do Packet Flow Monitoring. • A “Flow” is an aggregated set of packets between two devices and use the same service, protocol, and ports. • Packet Flow data can show the source of network traffic and congestion. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Port Scanners A Port Scanner scans one IP address, or a range of IP addresses, looking for open ports. Some Port Scanners can scan an IP range looking for a specific open port, sometimes called Port Sweeping. Port Scanning is generally done for one of the two reasons: • To scan someone else’s system, trying to find a way into their system • To scan your own system, to make sure there are no openings that might give others access. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Interface Monitoring Other network interface monitoring tools can provide: • Network performance • Device discovery • Interface connections and resets • Packet drops • Link speed and duplex setting Useful network monitoring tools include Solarwinds, ManageEngine, NetMon (Windows), and Network Utility (Mac) ! Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. SNMP Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) • A fundamental part of Internet Protocol (IP), SNMP functions at the Application Layer • Allows parameters on the network device to be read and/or set by Network Management Station (NMS) • Most (but not all) network devices support SNMP • Support may be unidirectional (read only) or bidirectional (read and write) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. • Information available via SNMP is stored in a tree of data called Management Information Base (MIB) • Each individual variable stored is referred to as an Object Identifier or OID, which looks like “1.4.6.1.3.866.2.4.1.2.1.1.1.3.2757.3” • Some devices have dozens or hundreds of OIDs, some have just a few. • The command to retrieve an OID from the MIB is called GET • To retrieve all OIDs in a MIB tree, a WALK command is used which uses GET and GETNEXT in sequence to retrieve all available SNMP data SNMP (contd.) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. SNMP (contd.) • Trap is an alert generated via SNMP on a managed device, sent to a Network Management Station (NMS), in response to predetermined criteria being met in one or more OIDs. • Typical OIDs: • Link speed • Duplex • Network address • System name • Uptime • Port statuses (for routers/switches) • Page count and ink status (for printers) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Alerts Alerts provide timely information about current network issues, security issues, vulnerabilities, and exploits. Alerts can be generated by SNMP traps, Interface Monitoring applications, or other network management tools. Alerts can be sent via: • Email • SMS Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Syslog • A Syslog server can collect messages from routers and other network devices. • Messages are aggregated, searched, and stored on the Syslog server. • Benefits: • No need to manually check each device • Log files can be stored indefinitely • Data from all network devices can be reviewed together Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. SIEM Security information and event management (SIEM) is a general term for software products and/or services combining security information management (SIM) and security event management (SEM). SIEM tools aggregate data from multiple network devices and applications, to provide: • Data correlation and alerting • Dashboards • Legal compliance and retention support • Forensic support SIEM is sometimes used interchangeably with SIM and SEM. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Environmental and Power Monitoring Three environmental elements can affect network operations and may need to be monitored: • Temperature – warm temperature in any given device may cause the device to fail or perform erratically. • Humidity – high humidity can cause corrosion in equipment, while low humidity can cause static electricity to build up and cause ESD problems • Power – a steady, stable flow of electricity, without dips, surges, and outages, is essential to keep computer equipment running smoothly. Monitoring devices for Temperature, Humidity, and Power can be integrated into any network monitoring system. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Wireless Survey Tools / Wireless Analyzers Wireless Analyzers – analyze Wi-Fi signals to determine channels in use, signal strength, bandwidth used, top talkers, and in some cases can also perform packet sniffing functions. Wireless Survey Tools – analyze signal strength and coverage area of wireless transmitters to help determine placement and troubleshoot problem areas. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. What tool would you use to monitor packets through a switch port on the network? 1 Port Scanner Packet Sniffer SNMP Interface Monitoring Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. What tool would you use to monitor packets through a switch port on the network? A packet sniffer or packet analyzer captures packets across a network interface. b. Port Scanner Packet Sniffer SNMP Interface Monitoring 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which protocol can be used to check interface settings on network devices? 2 SNMP SYSLOG 802.11n Wireless Analyzer Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which protocol can be used to check interface settings on network devices? Simple Network Management (SNMP) protocol allows parameters on a network device to be read. a. SNMP SYSLOG 802.11n Wireless Analyzer 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Network monitoring tools give you insight into things you can’t see on your network • Packet Sniffers capture all packets transmitted across a network interface • A Port Scanner scans one IP address, or a range of IP addresses, looking for open ports • SNMP allows parameters (OIDs) on a network device to be read and/or set by a Network Management Station • SIEM tools aggregate data from multiple network devices to provide data correlation, dashboards, compliance information, and forensic support • Monitoring variables such as temperature and humidity is called Environmental Monitoring • Wireless Analyzers analyze Wi-Fi signals to determine channels in use, signal strength, bandwidth used, and more Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Metrics and Reports’. This concludes ‘Monitoring Tools’.