Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 1: Network Theory and Architecture CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 1-1: Networking Theory Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. ●Define a Network and Network Devices ●Describe the basic characteristics of a LAN, WAN, MAN, and WLAN ●Explain the uses of Bluetooth and NFC ●Describe the purpose of SCADA ●Explain the benefit of segmentation in Medianets After completing this lesson, you will be able to: Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. • A Network is an interconnected group of computers or devices which can communicate with each other. • The connection may be wired or wireless. • Each device on the network is called a Node or Host. Network Theory and Types of Networks Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. • Computers • Servers & and Storage • Printers • Routers, Firewalls, Switches, and other Network Devices • VoIP Phones • IP Security Cameras • Game Consoles • Internet-Capable TVs or Music Devices • Home Appliances • Industrial or Medical Equipment • Smartphones and Tablets Network Theory and Types of Networks Devices on a network may include: Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. LAN (Local Area Network) • A network in a particular geographic location such as an office, floor, or building. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. WAN (Wide Area Network) • A network spanning multiple geographic locations. • Broadband connections from Internet Service Providers are (usually) WANs. • A common misconception is that WAN means “Wireless Area Network”. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. MAN (Metropolitan Area Network) • A WAN that spans an entire city or metropolitan area. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. WLAN (Wireless LAN) • A network comprised of wireless connections, or the portion of a LAN that uses wireless connections. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Mobile Hotspot • A Hotspot is a portable wireless access point, most often using cellular networks. • A Hotspot can be used to connect wireless devices to the Internet or to each other, in areas where there is no permanent network infrastructure (or where using the infrastructure is expensive). • A Hotspot may be a separate device, or can also be an app run from a smartphone, turning the phone into a Hotspot. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. PAN (Personal Area Network) • A network used among devices such as a computer, tablet, smartphone, or PDA, for a single user. • A PAN may use wired connections such as USB and FireWire, or wireless connections such as Bluetooth, IR/IrDA, or INSTEON. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Bluetooth • Bluetooth: a low power wireless connection protocol designed to replace short cables to connect devices. • It is used by local devices such as keyboards, mice, speakers, headsets and headphones, intercoms, phones, tablets, and more. • Bluetooth uses the 2.4GHz radio spectrum, which is also used by Wi-Fi, cordless phones, and other unregulated wireless devices. • Up to 7 devices can connect to one Bluetooth host. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. NFC: Near Field Communication • Used for wireless communication in very close proximity (less than 10cm). • NFC is built into many smartphones as well as some tablets and computers. • Uses can include: • Mobile payment solutions such as Apple Pay or Google Wallet • Marketing, such as embedding NFC Info tags in movie posters to give NFC-enabled devices additional information • Identification – NFC Info tags can be embedded in packages and shipping containers for easy identification by NFC readers. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. IrDA / IR • IR: Infrared, also known as IrDA for the Infrared Data Association. • Infrared can be used for wireless communication between devices. • Infrared is a form of light, so IR works only when there is a clear line-of-sight between the receiver and transmitter. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. ICS: Industrial Control System • ICS is a generic term for several types of control systems used in Industrial Production. • The most common type is Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. SCADA • SCADA works with: • Sensors (Analog or Digital) • Remote Terminal Units (RTUs), used for human interaction and display. • Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs), used to gather data from Sensors • ICS Server: Acquires information from Sensors, PLCs, and RTUs about the status of equipment for display or recording purposes • The network connecting ICS devices is referred to as a Distributed Control System (DCS). • A best practice is for the DCS to be a Closed Network, not connected to outside networks or the Internet. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Medianets • Medianets refer to networks primarily devoted to audio and video communication. This can include: • Voice-over-IP (VoIP) Phone Systems • Unified Communications services such as Microsoft Lync or Skype • Media broadcast services, such as the network carrying audio and video feeds for a television station • Video Teleconferencing (VTC) solutions, which enable remote meetings and collaboration. • Older VTC Solutions use the H.320 standard over ISDN connections. • Modern VTC Solutions use Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) or the H.323 standard over IP Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. • Medianets and Segmentation • Medianets are often separated from the rest of the network, which is called Segmentation. • Segmentation lets VTC and other high-bandwidth applications run with high performance and low latency. • Segmentation also offers greater security since the media applications are separated from normal network use Medianets (contd.) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Quiz Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which of the following best describes a network which spans multiple geographic locations? 1 LAN WAN MAN WLAN Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which of the following best describes a network which spans multiple geographic locations? A network spanning multiple geographic locations or combining multiple private networks is a WAN. b. LAN WAN MAN WLAN 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which of the following technologies would you be most likely to use in a PAN? 2 Fiber Optics Cabling Wi-Fi SCADA Bluetooth Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which of the following technologies would you be most likely to use in a PAN? A Personal Area Network (PAN) usually uses USB, Firewire, Bluetooth, or IR. d. Fiber Optics Cabling Wi-Fi SCADA Bluetooth 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary ● A Network is an interconnected group of computers or devices which can communicate with each other. ● A LAN is a network in a particular geographic location such as an office, floor, or building. ● A WAN is a network spanning multiple geographic locations. ● Bluetooth is a low power wireless connection protocol designed to replace short cables to connect devices. ● The most common type of Industrial Control System (ICS) is Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA). Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘OSI Model’. This concludes ‘Networking Theory’.