Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 3: Security CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 3-3: Network Hardening Techniques Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: Describe the three types of anti-malware protection and their uses. Explain four ways the switches can be configured to improve security. Discuss the importance of security policies. Identify unsecure protocols and unneeded services. Explain how access lists can be used to improve network security. Discuss the three main types of wireless security protocols. Identify various types of user authentication protocols. Describe how hashes are used. Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Anti-Malware software • Anti-malware software protects against viruses and other malware and is mandatory in a secure network • Host-based – installed on each local PC or device • Cloud/server-based – a hybrid solution which runs a small client on each host with the processing done at least partially by a cloud-based server. • Network-based – malware protection running on a firewall, proxy server, or cloud server protecting network transactions (e.g. DNS filtering) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Switch Port Security • DHCP snooping – limiting DHCP responses to designated, trusted switch ports. • ARP inspection – verifying IP-to-MAC mapping in packets, preventing ARP cache poisoning attacks • MAC address filtering – whitelist or blacklist devices based on their MAC address • VLAN assignments – dividing hosts into VLANs limits their access to sensitive network areas by segmenting the network Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Security Policy • Security policies communicate to users what they should do to protect the network, which potentially include: • Clean-desk policy • BYOD policy • Data storage and privacy • Security audits • Consent to monitoring • Recording policy Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Disable Unneeded Services • Disable or remove any network services which aren’t needed to reduce your potential attack surface. • IIS • Telnet • FTP • NNTP • Flash • Mail/Exchange Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Secure vs Unsecure Protocols Secure SSH SNMPv3 TLS/SSL SFTP HTTPS IPsec Unsecure TELNET HTTP SLIP FTP TFTP SNMPv1/v2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Firewalls and Access Lists • Firewalls and proxy servers allow filtering based on a list of rules and criteria. Filtering can be based on: • Web/Content – the content of a website (or, less often, a document or file) is analyzed and compared to a list of criteria. This may include filtering known topical sites (porn, violence, games, employment) or may include filtering based on the site contents. • Port – traffic for known or allowed ports (port 80 for http, port 21 for FTP, port 123 for NTP, etc.) can be allowed while other ports are blocked. • IP – individual IP addresses can be blocked or allowed • Many firewalls default to an “Implicit Deny” policy, meaning any traffic which is not expressly allowed by the access list is denied. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Wireless Security • WEP – Wired Equivalent Privacy • WPA – Wi-Fi Protected Access • WPA2 *recommended* • Personal – Pre-shared Key (PSK), suitable for home and small business • Enterprise – (802.1x mode), requires a RADIUS/EAP server for authentication • WPS *disable* Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Wireless Security (contd.) • TKIP vs AES encryption • TKIP = 128bit encryption, used by WPA • AES (also CCMP) = advanced encryption, used by WPA2 • 802.1x –authentication protocol defining the RADIUS/EAP authentication relationship and requirements • TLS – Transport Layer Security, highly secure authentication mechanism but requires certificates for client and server. • TTLS – Tunneling TLS, also secure but only requires certificate for the server. • MAC filtering Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. User Authentication Authentication is the process of determining whether someone or something is, in fact, who or what it is declared to be. • CHAP – Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol • Shared Secret (user password) • Authenticator sends challenge • Peer responds with hashed response of the challenge plus shared secret • Authenticator verifies, accepts or drops, periodically rechecks • MSCHAP -- Microsoft’s version • PAP – Password Authentication Protocol; older, insecure alternative to CHAP • EAP – Extensible Authentication Protocol; framework for authentication, included in 802.1x • Kerberos – ticket-based network authentication protocol, requires a trusted third party (server) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. User Authentication (contd.) • Two-factor/Multifactor authentication –using two or more methods for authenticating a user or connection. • Single sign-on – a technique to federate multiple authentication portals so that each will accept authorized users from another, thus preventing the necessity to sign in multiple times. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Hashes A Hash function is a function that can be used to map digital data of arbitrary size to digital data of fixed size. Hashes are used to verify authentication data such as passwords. • MD5 – popular cryptographic hash, which was widely used. By 2012 MD5 was no longer recommended due to known exploits. • SHA – Secure Hash Algorithm, a family of cryptographic hashes designed to be more secure than MD5. SHA-0 and SHA-1 are no longer recommended. SHA-2 is currently the recommended standard with SHA-3 an alternative. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Verifying packets are going to the correct destination can be done by: 1 ARP Inspection Packet Analyzing Content Filtering Using VLANs Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Verifying packets are going to the correct destination can be done by: ARP Inspection verifies that the IP address of a packet matches the MAC address it’s being sent to, and is a function available in higher level switches. a. ARP Inspection Packet Analyzing Content Filtering Using VLANs 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which of the following wireless security protocols is the most secure? 2 WEP WPA2 CHAP WPS Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which of the following wireless security protocols is the most secure? WEP and WPS have known vulnerabilities and should not be used. CHAP is not a wireless protocol. WPA2 is the most secure of the wireless security protocols widely used today. b. WEP WPA2 CHAP WPS 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Anti-malware software protects against viruses and other malware and is mandatory in a secure network • Four ways to improve security at the switch level include DHCP Snooping, ARP Inspection, MAC Address Filtering, and VLAN Assignments. • Disabling or removing any network services which aren’t needed is a good way to reduce your potential attack surface. • Access Lists can limit traffic through a firewall or proxy by listing websites and content, ports, or IPs which are allowed or blocked. • WEP, WPA, and WPA2 are types of wireless security protocols. • A hash function such as MD5 or SHA is used to verify authentication information. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Physical Security Controls’. This concludes ‘Network Hardening Techniques’.