Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 5: Standards and Best Practices CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 5-1: Policies and Procedures Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: ● Describe the role of Policies and Procedures in an organization ● Identify the different types of Security Policies ● Describe the use of ‘Consent to Monitoring’ clauses ● Explain Acceptable Use Policies of an organization ● Describe common standard business documents, including a Service Level Agreement, Memorandum of Understanding, Master Services Agreement, and Statement of Work Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Every organization needs Policies and Procedures for their users. • Policies communicate to users what behavior is expected and what behavior is not allowed, and create a legal foundation to take action against those users if the Policies are not followed. • Procedures define what steps will be taken in the event of a security breach or other serious issues. • NOT having well-defined Policies and Procedures leave users and administrators to decide for themselves what behavior is appropriate and what should be done to resolve issues, and the results are likely to be unpredictable. Policies and Procedures Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Security Policies Security Policies may include guidelines for: • Physical Security – access to the building, access to servers, and access to key network components. • Data and Document Security – this pertains to where important information is stored (both digitally and physically) and how data stored on mobiles, laptops, flash drives, printouts, and other media should be handled. • Network Security (Network Policies) – this pertains to defining levels of user access for sensitive areas of the network, password retention policies. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Consent to Monitoring A common part of Security Policies is a ‘Consent to Monitoring’ clause, which notifies the user that their activities on the organization’s computer, network, or website may be monitored. Consent to Monitoring clauses are also commonly included in online Terms and Conditions on websites and web applications. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Acceptable Use Policies An Acceptable Use Policy (AUP) is a set of rules governing how an organization’s network, website, and other computer systems should be used. • New employees or members are generally required to sign an Acceptable Use Policy as a condition of using the organization’s systems. • Failure to abide by the AUP can result in disciplinary actions and/or the termination of employment with a company. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Standard Business Documents – Service Level Agreement A Service Level Agreement (SLA) is an agreement defining the scope, quality, and responsibilities related to a service. • In the IT sector, an SLA is commonly used in a vendor/client relationship to detail the responsibilities of the vendor in providing a specific service. For example, the SLA for an Internet service provider might guarantee 99% uptime and a 2 hour outage response. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Standard Business Documents– Memorandum of Understanding A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) documents the agreed upon terms between two parties. • Less binding than a formal agreement or contract, an MOU is often the first step in documenting the relationship between two parties. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. A Master Services Agreement (MSA) is a contract between two parties that specifies the terms of the relationship between the parties. • The MSA often details general areas such as payment terms, warranties, ownership of intellectual property, dispute resolution, and similar general items. • In IT relationships, an MSA is often used to establish the framework for transactions while each project is detailed in a specific Statement of Work. Standard Business Documents– Master Services Agreement Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. A Statement of Work (SOW) details the specific requirements and deliverables for a particular project. • The SOW generally includes pricing, delivery timetables, deliverables and/or activities, as well as general terms and conditions and criteria for acceptable quality standards. Standard Business Documents– Statement of Work Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. The clause commonly found in a security policy which informs the user that their activity may be monitored is called ________________ . 1 Acceptable Use Policy Master Services Agreement Consent to Monitoring Consent to Services Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. The clause commonly found in a security policy which informs the user that their activity may be monitored is called ________________ . A common part of Security Policies is a Consent to Monitoring clause which notifies the user that their activities on the organization’s computer, network, or website may be monitored. c. Acceptable Use Policy Master Services Agreement Consent to Monitoring Consent to Services 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. What type of agreement might be used to guarantee a certain level of uptime? 2 SLA MSA MOU RTM Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. What type of agreement might be used to guarantee a certain level of uptime? The Service Level Agreement (SLA) defining the scope, quality, and responsibilities related to a service, which can include uptime guarantees. a. SLA MSA MOU RTM 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Policies communicate to users what behavior is expected and what behavior is not allowed. • A common part of Security Policies is a Consent to Monitoring clause which notifies the user that their activities on the organization’s computer, network, or website may be monitored. • An Acceptable Use Policy (AUP) is a set of rules governing how an organizations’ network, website, and other computer systems should be used • A Service Level Agreement (SLA) is an agreement defining the scope, quality, and responsibilities related to a service. • A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) documents the agreed upon terms between two parties. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Safety Practices’. This concludes ‘Policies and Procedures’.