Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 5: Standards and Best Practices CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 5-2: Safety Practices Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Discuss electrical safety measures • Identify the risks of Electrostatic Discharge (ESD) • List the different installation techniques • Discuss placement considerations • Describe a Materials Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) • List emergency procedures and protocols • Identify fire suppression systems Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Electrical Safety and Electrostatic Discharge Almost all IT equipment is electrical in nature – therefore, technicians should be mindful of Electrical Safety at all times. • Ensure all electrical wiring meets local building codes • Avoid using equipment with exposed wiring, worn or broken cords or switches • All computer equipment should be Grounded, which means the grounding wire or plug should be properly connected to a grounded electrical outlet or similar grounded item • Consider using Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) Guidelines as your best practices approach to electrical safety Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Electrostatic Discharge (ESD) is the sudden transfer of static electricity into a computer, server, or similar device, and it is a serious danger to computer and network equipment. • Static energy (Electrostatic charges) can build up in people, in tools, or in other equipment. If a charged person or item comes into contact with a conductive piece of equipment – such as a computer – the static energy can discharge into the equipment, causing significant damage. • To prevent the risk of ESD, grounding straps can be employed to connect a person or tool to a Ground source, discharging any potential static electricity before it can come into contact with sensitive equipment. • Grounding mats help prevent the buildup of static electricity as well. • Whenever possible unplug equipment before servicing it. Electrostatic Discharge Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Installation Safety Physical injury from lifting equipment is not uncommon among IT professionals. • To protect yourself from injury, remember these techniques: • Lift with your legs, not your back • Bend at your knees, NOT at your waist • Do not twist when lifting • Keep heavy objects close to your torso • Push instead of pull whenever possible Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Rack Installation Network racks provide a cleaner, safer way to mount network devices compared to scattered devices on shelves, walls, and floors. Some considerations when using racks: • If using a rack, make sure equipment is mounted properly with appropriate electrical power and ventilation. • Make sure the rack is balanced and secured – too much equipment near the top of the rack can make it top-heavy and more likely to fall over. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. When working inside servers or other computer equipment, be mindful of using conductive or magnetic tools that may short out powered circuits or potentially cause data problems with hard drives or other media. • Protect your eyes, nose, and mouth when using compressed air to clean inside equipment – always blow away from your body. • Avoid using any equipment which can generate static electricity – especially standard vacuum cleaners. If necessary, special static-free vacuum cleaners, sometimes called data vacs or toner vacs, are available. Tool Safety Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Equipment placed on the floor is more likely to collect dust through ventilation fans, and more likely to be damaged by flooding. • Equipment placed up high is more likely to fall or cause a shelf or rack to tip over. • Servers and other network equipment should never be placed near a potential water source – this includes break rooms or kitchens where there is any risk of a user spilling a drink on or in the equipment. • All equipment should have adequate cooling and air flow – be especially mindful of cables which can block access or block air vents for other equipment. Placement Considerations Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Materials Safety Data Sheet A Materials Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) accompanies any chemicals or other dangerous items. In IT, this will generally include cleaning supplies but may also include toner or ink used in printing. • The MSDS details physical characteristics of the substance including its melting point, boiling point, flash point, toxicity, health effects, reactivity, storage concerns, and disposal information. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Emergency Procedures IT personnel should consider the effect of emergency procedures on the IT systems. This includes: • Building Layout – Are rooms and furniture arranged so that people can’t be trapped in case of a fire or other disaster? • Fire Escape Plan – Are there clearly designated routes out of the building in case of fire? Is there a designated meeting point to verify staff safety? • Safety/Emergency Exits – Are the emergency exits well marked and easily accessible, especially if power fails? Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Emergency Procedures (contd.) • Fail Open/Fail Close – If electrical power fails, should doors with electronic locks automatically open (“fail open”) or stay locked (“fail closed”)? If they Fail Close, is there a manual override to prevent people from being trapped behind the door? • Emergency Alert Systems – Is there a system in place to alert everyone when a fire or other disaster occurs? Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Emergency Procedures • Fire Suppression Systems – Are fire extinguishers readily available in case of fire? Should a water-based fire sprinkler system be in place, or is a more expensive Halon system a better choice? (Water-based sprinklers are most common but will damage computer equipment if deployed. Halon is a non- conducting fire suppressant, which is less likely to destroy IT systems) • HVAC – Is the environmental system adequate to prevent overheating in server rooms and other IT areas? Are humidity controls in place to prevent high humidity (which can cause corrosion) or very low humidity (which can cause static electricity problems)? Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. To reduce damage to equipment from electricity, IT personnel should: 1 Use Battery backups Use Grounding straps Avoid using worn or broken power cords or switches All of the above Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. To reduce damage to equipment from electricity, IT personnel should: All of these can help to prevent various electrical risks around IT equipment. d. Use Battery backups Use Grounding Straps Avoid using worn or broken power cords or switches All of the above 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. The sudden discharge of static electricity into a computer, server, or similar device is best referred to as: 2 ESL Lightning Ground Fault ESD Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. The sudden discharge of static electricity into a computer, server, or similar device is best referred to as: Electrostatic Discharge (ESD) is the sudden discharge of static electricity into a computer, server, or similar device. d. ESL Lightning Ground Fault ESD 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary ●Technicians should be mindful of Electrical Safety at all times, and avoid using equipment with exposed wiring, worn or broken cords or switches. ●Electrostatic Discharge (ESD) is the sudden transfer of static electricity into a computer, server, or similar device, and it is a serious danger to computer and network equipment. ●IT personnel should consider the effect of emergency procedures on the IT systems. ●Installation safety protocols must be followed to prevent any injuries. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Install and Configure Equipment’. This concludes ‘Safety Practices’.