Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 1: Network Theory and Architecture CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 1-2: OSI Model Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. ●Describe the OSI model ●List the seven layers of the OSI model ●Describe the basic characteristics of each layer ●Identify which layers handle Bits, Frames, Packets, and Segments ●Apply the OSI model to troubleshoot networks After completing this lesson, you will be able to: Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The OSI Model For a network connection to work, many things must take place. • The Open Systems Interconnection Reference Model (OSI Model) is a useful guide to understanding the seven layers of activity involved in a network connection. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The Seven Layers of the OSI Model 1- Physical 2- Data Link 3- Network 4- Transport 5- Session 6- Presentation 7- Application •Each layer builds on the level below it, but is (mostly) independent. •Layers represent a group of communication functions. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Reference Guide 1-Physical 2-Data Link 3-Network 4-Transport 5-Session 6-Presentation 7-Application The OSI model is a useful reference guide to understanding and troubleshooting networks. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The OSI Model Remembering the order of the layers is important – these acrostics may help: •Please Do Not Tell Sales People Anything •Please Do Not Throw Sausage Pizza Away •All People Seem To Need Data Processing 5 - Session 1 - Physical 2 - Data Link 3 - Network 4 - Transport 5 - Session 6 - Presentation 7 -Application Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. A Simple Analogy 1 - Physical 2 - Data Link 3 - Network 4 - Transport 5 - Session 6 - Presentation 7 -Application 1 - Chicken 2 – Chicken Lays Egg 3 – Egg Collected by Farmer 4 – Egg Sold at Market 5 – Egg Purchased by Restaurant 6 – Chef Cooks Egg 7 –Customer Gets Cooked Egg Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. 1 – The Physical Layer Includes all physical elements involved in transmitting and receiving BITS: • Cables or radio spectrum • Physical ports, network cards, Wi-Fi transmitters The Physical Layer sends and receives BITS ! Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Provides basic error correction Includes two sub-layers: • MAC layer – handles physical addressing and topology (Media Access Control) • LLC Layer – coordinates and synchronizes with other devices on the network (Logical Link Control) Used by network switches 2 – The Data Link Layer 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 The Data link layer sends and receives FRAMES (a Sequence of 64 to 1518 bytes) ! Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Protocols such as IP, IPX, or AppleTalk exist in this layer and is used by Routers 3 – The Network Layer The Network layer sends and receives PACKETS (a chunk of data) ! Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Connects the low level communications “hardware” in levels 1 through 3 with higher level software in levels 5 through 7. • Common layer 4 protocols are: • TCP, or Transmission Control Protocol • UDP, or User Datagram Protocol 4 – The Transport Layer The Transport layer communicates with SEGMENTS ! Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. This layer constructs, supports, and deconstructs sessions as needed by services in the higher layers. 5 – The Session Layer Session: A set of related communications that should be treated separately from other communications, similar to a conversation. ! Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. This layer is where data formatting and encryption may take place. • Example: Converting ASCII-encoded text to EBCDIC or vice-versa Sometimes known as the syntax layer. It is often included as part of layer 7 6 – The Presentation Layer Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. This layer provides network services or applications to software running on the device. • Often confused with actual user applications such as email programs, Internet browsers, etc. • Includes HTTP, FTP, SMTP, SNMP, etc. 7 – The Application Layer Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Using the OSI Model in Troubleshooting 1 - Physical 2 - Data Link 3 - Network 4 - Transport 5 - Session 6 - Presentation 7 -Application 1 - Chicken 2 – Chicken Lays Egg 3 – Egg Collected by Farmer 4 – Egg Sold at Market 5 – Egg Purchased by Restaurant 6 – Chef Cooks Egg 7 –Customer Gets Cooked Egg Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Using the OSI Model in Troubleshooting 1 - Physical 2 - Data Link 3 - Network 4 - Transport 5 - Session 6 - Presentation 7 -Application 1 - Chicken 2 – Chicken Lays Egg 3 – Egg Collected by Farmer 4 – Egg Sold at Market 5 – Egg Purchased by Restaurant 6 – Chef Cooks Egg 7 –Customer Gets Cooked Egg Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Using the OSI Model in Troubleshooting 1 - Physical 2 - Data Link 3 - Network 4 - Transport 5 - Session 6 - Presentation 7 -Application 1 - Chicken 2 – Chicken Lays Egg 3 – Egg Collected by Farmer 4 – Egg Sold at Market 5 – Egg Purchased by Restaurant 6 – Chef Cooks Egg 7 –Customer Gets Cooked Egg Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Quiz Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. A standard network switch operates at which layer of the OSI model? 1 Layer 1 - Physical Layer 2 - Data Link Layer 3 - Network Layer 7 - Application Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. A standard network switch operates at which layer of the OSI model? A standard network switch uses Frames to control network traffic, making it a Layer 2 device. Managed or Multi-Layer switches may also operate on Layer 3. b. Layer 1 - Physical Layer 2 - Data Link Layer 3 - Network Layer 7 - Application 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Layer 3, the Network layer, is concerned with sending and receiving ________. 2 Bits Frames Packets Sessions Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Layer 3, the Network layer, is concerned with sending and receiving ________. The Network layer is where protocols such as IP send Packets. c. Bits Frames Packets Sessions 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary ● The Open Systems Interconnection Reference Model (OSI Model) is a useful guide to understanding the seven layers of activity involved in a network connection. ● The Physical Layer includes all physical elements involved in transmitting and receiving BITS. • The Data link layer sends and receives FRAMES (Sequences of 64 to 1518 bytes). ● Protocols such as IP exist in the Network layer, which sends and receives PACKETS. ● A Session is a set of related communications that should be treated separately from other communications, similar to a conversation. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Network Topologies’. This concludes ‘OSI Model’.