Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 5: Standards and Best Practices CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 5-4: Change Management Procedures Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Describe a Change Request • Identify the components of a Change Request • Discuss the Approval Process • Explain the difference between Maintenance Windows and Downtime Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Network Changes Any significant alteration of a network that impacts how the network is used. Examples of Network Changes: • Physically moving network equipment to a new location • Configuration changes to IP addresses or subnets • Replacement of network routers, switches, or other equipment • Changes to policies or procedures • Changes to shared drives or devices Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Change Requests Changes to network configurations should not be done casually. Any change needs to be planned, documented, approved, and tested. The procedure for requesting, approving, testing, communicating, and documenting a network change is referred to as a Change Request. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The process must begin with documenting the reason for the requested change. • During the process, if the requested change is adjusted due to conflicts or other reasons, the final change must still address the original reason – or else, there is no reason to change. Document Reason for the Change Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The initial stage of making the change starts with a change request. Depending on the nature and size of the organization this may be formal or informal. The Change Request should include: • Configuration procedures – what exact steps are needed to implement the change? • Rollback process – in case of problems, how will the change be rolled back? • Potential impact – what possible risks are caused by this change? What other systems are affected? • Notification – who needs to be notified of the change, and how will they be notified? Department heads, users, and other system administrators are likely to be included here. Change Request Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Approval Process Change requests should be reviewed by an appropriate cross- section of affected parties – users, department heads, and IT staff. Some organizations have formal approval processes for significant network changes, which may include a Change Control Board to take responsibility for supervising the change. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Maintenance Windows and Downtime Many networks have designated Maintenance Windows, often on weekends when network usage is low. • Significant changes should be done during the Maintenance Window. • When changes cannot be performed during designated Maintenance Windows, additional Authorized Downtime can be scheduled with the permission of management. • While Downtime can refer to any time when the network or systems are unavailable due to issues or maintenance, planned downtime such as Maintenance Windows and other Authorized Downtime is less disruptive than unscheduled outages. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Once the change is complete, and any issues are resolved, all users and stakeholders affected by the change must be notified that the change is complete. Notification can include: • Users • System Administrators • Helpdesk and technical support teams • Training staff • Any other stakeholders Notification of Change Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The final step is to update the network documentation to include: • Any changes to the network configurations • Any additions to the network • Any physical location changes • Any other significant network changes Documentation Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. The request and approval process to make a network change is referred to as: 1 Asset Management Distribution Frame Change Request Maintenance Window Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. The request and approval process to make a network change is referred to as: The procedure for requesting, approving, testing, communicating, and documenting a network change is referred to as a Change Request. c. Asset Management Distribution Frame Change Request Maintenance Window 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which of these is NOT part of the change request approval process? 2 users vendors department heads IT staff Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which of these is NOT part of the change request approval process? 2 The change request approval process generally includes users, department heads, and IT staff. b. users vendors department heads IT staff Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • The procedure for requesting, approving, testing, communicating, and documenting a network change is referred to as a Change Request. • A Change Request should include configuration procedures, rollback processes, potential impact, and notifications. • Some organizations have formal approval processes for significant network changes, which may include a Change Control Board to take responsibility for supervising the change. • A Maintenance Window is a designated time when Network Changes can be performed. Additional Authorized Downtime may be scheduled if Network Changes cannot be performed during scheduled Maintenance Windows. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Course Complete This concludes ‘Change Management Procedures’.