Ubuntu Fundamentals Ubuntu Dashboard Learning Objectives By the end of this lesson, you will be able to: Explore the Ubuntu Gnome desktop interface Analyze the various tabs in Ubuntu and their functions Apply system settings in Ubuntu to enable different features Outline the network configuration using GUI Introduction to Dashboard The different desktop managers or environments available for Ubuntu are: 1. Gnome desktop (default) 2. KDE Plasma desktop 3. Mate desktop 4. Budgie desktop 5. Xfce/Xubuntu desktop 6. Cinnamon desktop 7. GNOME Flashback desktop 8. LXQt desktop Main Desktop Dashboard When you log in to your Ubuntu system, you will get the desktop dashboard view. The view contains multiple tabs on the left-hand side of the screen. Firefox Web Browser You can install the browser of your choice, but Firefox is the default browser available in Ubuntu. Home Folder • The given screenshot depicts how a home folder appears in the Ubuntu environment. • Home folder is the home directory of a user. LibreOffice Writer LibreOffice Writer is similar to Microsoft Word. It is used to create, write, and save documents. Ubuntu Software Center Ubuntu software center is a utility for installing and managing software in Ubuntu. Ubuntu Software Center The update tab of the Ubuntu software center allows you to update the installed software to the latest version. System Settings System settings of Ubuntu help you enable the different features of each category in the system. System Settings The Appearance tab is used to change the color, icon size, and theme of the desktop. System Settings The Background tab is used to change the display of the background. System Settings The Bluetooth tab is used to enable Bluetooth communication service and connect to nearby devices. System Settings The Notification tab is used to enable notification services to various applications. System Settings The Application tab allows you to set application relevant attributes. System Settings The Displays tab allows you to set the resolution and orientation of the interface. System Settings The Keyboard Shortcuts tab gives you the list of shortcut keys used for frequently accessed functions. System Settings The Mouse and Touchpad tab is used to configure the mouse settings. System Settings The Online Accounts tab is normally used as a common repository for storing personal resources. System Settings The Power tab is used to enable power-saving modes like blank screen and automatic suspend. System Settings The Printers tab is used to configure the connected printer. System Settings The Privacy tab can be used to control the privacy aspect of the desktop interface. System Settings The Removable Media tab is used to manage the removable media connected to the system. System Settings The Search tab is used to search for an element within the application. • On the left-hand side of the search results, you can see the icons of applications that provided the search results feature. System Settings The Sharing tab is used to share a resource through a network. System Settings The Sound tab is used to configure the audio settings of the system. System Settings The Network tab is used to configure the various network settings for the system. System Settings You can also set the identity of the machine and adjust the MTU. System Settings IP can be set manually or via DHCP in the network settings option. System Settings Security settings, such as authentication or dot1x security, can also be set from the Network tab. Workspaces • Workspaces refer to the grouping of windows on your desktop. You can have multiple workspaces to run multiple apps simultaneously. • Workspaces can be used to organize your work. This reduces clutter and makes your desktop easier to navigate. • Workspaces are useful when you have a lot of apps running at once and want to separate them by tasks. Network Manager Network manager is a network service that can be configured by GUI. It is a system network service that manages your network devices and connections. It attempts to keep the network connectivity active when available. It manages Ethernet and Wi-Fi, and can be accessed through the settings. Key Takeaways Home folder is the home directory of a user. LibreOffice is used to create, write, and save documents. Workspaces refer to the grouping of windows on your desktop. Network manager manages your network devices and connections. Knowledge Check Knowledge Check A. B. C. D. 1 What is the default desktop environment in Ubuntu? KDE plasma Mate Xfce Gnome Knowledge Check The correct answer is A. B. C. D. What is the default desktop environment in Ubuntu? 1 Gnome is the default desktop environment in Ubuntu. A KDE plasma Mate Xfce Gnome Knowledge Check A. B. C. D. 2 Which of the following functions can be performed in the Ubuntu software center? (Select all that apply.) Installing software Updating software Removing software Editing source code Knowledge Check The correct answer is A. B. C. D. 2 Which of the following functions can be performed in the Ubuntu software center? (Select all that apply.) Ubuntu software center allows you to install, update, and remove software. A,B, and C Installing software Updating software Removing software Editing source code Knowledge Check A. B. C. D. 3 Which category does LibreOffice belong to? (Select all that apply.) Office suite Database app Text editor Pdf writer Knowledge Check The correct answer is A. B. C. D. 3 Which category does LibreOffice belong to? (Select all that apply.) LibreOffice is an open source office suite similar to MS Office suite. A and C Office suite Database app Text editor Pdf writer