Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 2: Operations CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 2-7: Wireless Infrastructure Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Describe the purpose of wireless routers, access points, and bridges • Explain the use of a heat map • Describe how SSIDs are configured for roaming • Distinguish between ad-hoc, infrastructure, and mesh topologies • Define wireless VLAN and wireless controller • Explain the benefits of a wireless bridge • Describe various ways to improve wireless throughput Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Going Wireless • It’s become the norm for organizations to supply wireless networks for their customers and/or staff. • Wireless networks are used for mobile devices, such as: • Notebook computers • Smartphones • Tablets • Security cameras • Media Devices (Roku, Chromecast, etc.) • Gaming Devices (Xbox, PlayStation) • Wireless networks also may be advantageous for desktop computers or other traditionally wired devices in areas where wiring is unavailable. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Wireless Routers For many small office/home office (SOHO) networks, the wireless router is the sole piece of network infrastructure with four functions. • Wireless Access Point – receiver/transmitter to connect wireless devices • Switched LAN ports – provide wired network connectivity • Bridge – connects the WLAN to the LAN • Router – connects your LAN to the WAN Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Wireless Access Point • Wireless Access Point (WAP or AP) is a wireless transmitter/receiver without the router and switch functions of the wireless router. • Access Points generally include one LAN port for connection to the wired network. • The number of APs or Wireless Routers needed for a given area depends on: • Device density • Environmental considerations (obstacles, interference) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Heat Map • Identifying the coverage area for all Access Points in a network can be done with a Site Survey. • A Site Survey is the planning and designing of a Wi-Fi network. • Initial placement of APs is based on estimated range, considering walls and other obstacles. • A Heat Map showing actual signal strength can be produced using special software utilities or a dedicated wireless meter. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. SSID • Each Wireless Router or AP is set to broadcast one or more Service Set IDentifiers (SSID). • The SSID is the name given to the wireless network connection at that AP. All devices connected to the same SSID are considered part of a Service Set. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Roaming • When two or more APs use the same SSID, wireless devices will choose which AP to connect to based on signal strength. • The wireless device will periodically re-evaluate which AP to connect to. • This process is called Roaming. • No special setup is required. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Advanced WLAN Management • Configuring one WAP is easy. Configuring dozens of Access Points can be complicated! • A WLAN Server (wireless controller) can configure multiple Access Points from one centralized control panel. • The wireless controller and APs communicate using one of the two popular protocols: • Lightweight Access Point Protocol (LWAPP) • Control and Provisioning of Wireless Access Points (CAPWAP) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Load Balancing with VLANs • Wireless APs are a Broadcast Domain • To break up congested APs, wireless clients can be assigned to VLANs to create separate broadcast domains. • Some wireless controllers support VLAN Pooling, where multiple VLANs are used on the same AP and with the same SSID • Benefits: • Multiple broadcast domains, less bandwidth wasted with broadcast traffic. • Can use multiple IP address spaces. • VLANs can be designated (for security), or the wireless controller can auto-assign based on load balancing. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Wireless Topologies • Ad-Hoc: A wireless network without access points or routers – wireless nodes communicate directly with each other. • Infrastructure: Standard wireless network where nodes connect to a wireless access point or router, which bridges the wireless network to a wired network. • Mesh: A network topology where each access point or each node relays data for the network as a whole. • Wireless mesh networks often use the WDS system to interconnect wireless access points. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Two-Building Problem Two buildings need to share a network – how can you connect them? Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Two-Building Problem (contd.) Copper? NO – connecting the buildings with Cat5 or similar cabling can cause electrical problems and destroy equipment due to the difference in potential energy between the buildings (aka ground loop) Fiber Optic? YES – but it can be expensive. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Wireless Bridge Wireless Bridge: uses two specialized Access Points to connect the two wired networks via Wi-Fi. Wireless Bridges can operate as a true bridge (with distinct subnets on each side) or as a “transparent bridge”, with the same subnet and settings carrying over to both sides. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Antenna Types and Placement Unidirectional • Signal primarily travels in one direction. • Best on the edge of a network or for a wireless bridge. • Signal radiates out in a (mostly) uniform radius from the antenna. • Best in the middle of a network or area. Omnidirectional Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. 2.4GHz vs 5GHz • 2.4GHz: • Used in 802.11b, g, n, and ac • Moves through obstacles better than 5GHz • More likely to have interference from other sources including microwaves, Bluetooth, cordless phones • 5GHz: • Used in 802.11a, n, and ac • Faster than 2.5GHz, more bandwidth • 802.11n – can use EITHER 2.4GHz or 5GHz • 802.11ac – uses BOTH 2.4GHz and 5GHz Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Faster Wireless • Throughput – the total bandwidth of a connection • Goodput – throughput, less the administrative overhead • Basic improvements: • Signal strength • Improved coverage • Channel selection Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Faster Wireless (contd.) • High Throughput Committee – 802.11n and 802.11ac • 802.11a-ht (5GHz) and 802.11g-ht (2.4GHz) 802.11n (300Mbps) • MIMO – Multiple Input, Multiple Output • Multiplexed signals from multiple (1-4) antennas • Spatial Multiplexing, Space-time Block Coding, Transmit Beamforming • MUMIMO – Multi-user MIMO Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. The name given to a wireless network connection is ________ . 1 Access Point Port SSID Channel Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. The name given to a wireless network connection is ________ . SSID is the name given to the wireless network connection on an access point. c. Access Point Port SSID Channel 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. You wish to extend your network into a nearby building. Fiber Optic cabling has been ruled out as being too expensive. What is your next best option? 2 Category 5 cabling run between the buildings VPN Site Survey Wireless Bridge Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. You wish to extend your network into a nearby building. Fiber Optic cabling has been ruled out as being too expensive. What is your next best option? A VPN could connect two networks together, but a wireless bridge can connect the two networks more easily and without the electrical risk of category 5 (or any copper) cabling. d. Category 5 cabling run between the buildings VPN Site Survey Wireless Bridge 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • A Wireless Access Point (WAP or AP) is a wireless transmitter/receiver without the router and switch functions of the wireless router. • A Site Survey is the planning and designing of a Wi-Fi network. • The SSID is the name given to the wireless network connection at that AP. All devices connected to the same SSID are considered part of a Service Set. • Roaming is when wireless devices will choose which AP to connect to based on signal strength. • A WLAN Server (wireless controller) can configure multiple Access Points from one centralized control panel • A Wireless Bridge uses two specialized Access Points to connect the two wired networks via Wi-Fi. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Areas of Risk’. This concludes ‘WLAN Considerations’.