Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 2: Operations CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 2-5: Patches and Updates Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Explain the importance of operating system updates and patches. • Define firmware and firmware updates. • Describe when driver updates are needed. • Explain the difference between major and minor releases. • Describe situations when upgrading or downgrading might be appropriate. Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. A Secure Network To be secure, a network can’t remain static. There is strong financial motivation for hackers to find new ways around the protections built into firewalls, routers, servers, and operating systems. Manufacturers regularly release new improved software and security patches to close security holes when they are identified. Patching and updating must be a routine part of all network administration. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Operating System (OS) Updates The most common update is the OS update – applying the updates and patches provided by Microsoft, Apple, or your OS vendor. • Modern operating systems contain between 10 million and 80 million lines of code. • OS updates patch security holes discovered within the code. • Some OS updates also add new features and functionality • OS updates should generally be applied monthly or as directed by the OS vendor Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Firmware Updates Firmware is the onboard instructions on a computer or network device, which control the low level functions and load the Operating System (if applicable). • Firmware updates are issued periodically for computers, routers, firewalls, and managed switches. • Many firmware updates patch security holes discovered in the firmware, or correct known issues. • Network administrators should review all devices on the network for firmware updates periodically. Before any firmware update you should backup any settings in the device, known as a Configuration Backup. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Driver Updates • Drivers are special code that tells the operating system how to communicate with a specific device or hardware component. • Just like firmware and the OS, drivers are periodically updated to correct issues with security, performance, or to fix errors. • The OS will often update its included drivers but may not update third-party drivers. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Vulnerability Patches When vulnerabilities are discovered in an Operating System or firmware, vulnerability patches (aka critical patches/updates, security patches) are often issued very quickly. • Patches that arrive outside the normal patch schedule are called “out-of-band”. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Upgrading vs Downgrading • Upgrading is replacing your current OS or firmware with a newer version. • Generally, upgrading regularly is a good idea. Newer versions may contain new security features and other improvements. • In some cases upgrading can cause compatibility problems with previous apps or hardware devices. • Downgrading is replacing a newer OS or firmware with an older version, and is sometimes necessary for compatibility purposes. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Major vs Minor Releases • A Major Release contains substantial new functionality and bug fixes. • A Minor Release contains bug fixes and minor improvements to existing features. • Most operating systems, drivers, and firmware updates are enumerated with version numbers such as XX.YY.ZZ, where XX is the version, YY is the major release, and ZZ is the minor release. • Major releases and new versions generally include all previously issued minor releases. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. When troubleshooting problems on a network device, which of the following can help to fix the problem? 1 Install any firmware or OS patches or updates Document the problem Check SNMP parameters Escalate the issue to senior management Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. When troubleshooting problems on a network device, which of the following can help to fix the problem? Updating patches and firmware can close security vulnerabilities and fix known device issues. a. Install any firmware or OS patches or updates Document the problem Check SNMP parameters Escalate the issue to senior management 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. A minor release generally includes which of these? 2 bug fixes and small improvements a new version of the software significant improvements updated backups Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. A minor release generally includes which of these? 2 A minor release includes bug fixes and minor improvements. a. bug fixes and small improvements a new version of the software significant improvements updated backups Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Patching and updating must be a routine part of all network administration. • Operating System updates should generally be applied monthly or as directed by the OS vendor. • Firmware is the onboard instructions on a computer or network device, which control the low level functions and load the Operating System (if applicable). • Drivers are special code that tells the Operating System how to communicate with a specific device or hardware component. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘VLANs and Switches’. This concludes ‘Patches and Updates’.