Introduction to Cyber Security Secure Enterprise Architecture and Component Learning Objectives Describe network architecture Explain wireless networks List the network security controls By the end of this lesson, you will be able to: Explain security testing Network Architecture Enterprise Network Architecture Networks are part of a large, centrally managed, and internetworked architecture solutions. Enterprise Network Architecture Web-based front-end application servers Mainframe servers Application and database servers Enterprise Network Architecture Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP) Organizations implement service-oriented architectures (SOA) with web software components. Extensible Markup Language (XML) Basics of Network Architecture Telecommunications: Electromagnetic transmission of data Protocol: A standard set of rules Types of Network Architecture Not Proprietary Integrates vendor implementations Closed Network Architecture Proprietary Not integrated with vendors Open Network Architecture Open System Interconnection (OSI) Model Open System Interconnection (OSI) Model OSI is a layered architecture. Helps in easier network management Simplifies the network design Helps in debugging network applications Seven Layers of OSI Model Application Presentation Session Transport Network Data Link Physical 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Types of Networks Types of Networks The types of networks are: Personal Area Network (PAN) Local Area Network (LAN) Wide Area Network (WAN) Metropolitan Area Network (MAN) Storage Area Network (SAN) Data Communication Systems Data Communication Systems A process of using computing technology to transfer data from one point to another. Data Communication Systems: Transfers digital data between nodes Uses ASCII, EBCDIC, and Unicode for conversion Data Communication Software Components Information to be communicated Sender and receiver Medium or channel The components of communication software are: Computer-Based and Business Information Systems Computer-Based Information System The computer- based information system are: Hardware Software applications Database Procedures People Internet Networks Telecommunications Business Information Systems Decision Support System Transaction Processing Management Information System Electronic Commerce SOA Systems Hardware Failure Hardware Failure It is a malfunction within the electronic circuits or electromechanical components Hardware Failure Physical Security Maintenance Media Sanitization Encryption Hardware Failure • Damaged Drive • Corrupted Drive • Storage Media • Computers • Virus • Spyware • Exposed Data • Lost Hardware Data Loss Malicious Code Data Corruption Physical Theft Hardware Failure Error reports Detect failures and provide corrective actions Availability reports Check downtime caused by inadequate facilities and excessive maintenance Utilization reports (automated) Document the utilization of machine and peripherals Asset management reports List the network inventory tools and their connected equipment Host-Based Security Host-Based Security Host security refers to securing the operating system from unauthorized access. Host-Based Security Controls Regular Backups Access Control Intrusion Detection System Antivirus Host-Based Firewalls Disk Encryption Wireless Networks and Virtual Private Network Wireless Networks Wireless networks are computer networks that are not connected by cables of any kind. Wireless Networks Benefit: Drawback: Mobility Network Reach Flexibility/Scalability Speed Security Wireless Attacks Pose challenges to security professionals Easy setup at the cost of security Wireless Countermeasures Use WPA3 authentication Use encryption Turn off SSID Use Antivirus Change the password Case Study: Wireless Attack Tel Aviv free Wi-Fi network was hacked. One notable example of how easy it can be for a hacker to take over a Wi-Fi network comes from Tel Aviv. Case Study: Wireless Attack The free Wi-Fi network of Tel Aviv was hacked. It incorporates basic security controls to keep users secure in the network. Case Study: Wireless Attack Noticed a new Wi-Fi access point Tested its security controls Discovered an HTTPS port 443 Virtual Private Network VPN extends the corporate network securely via encrypted packets sent out via virtual connections over the public internet to distant offices, home workers, salespeople, and business partners. Virtual Private Network Increases the network span Accesses their corporate enterprise Communicates with business partners Helps in being efficient and effective Helps grow their business Types of Virtual Private Network Remote access VPN Intranet VPN Extranet VPN Virtual Private Network Hardware limitations Man-in-the-middle attacks Endpoints Physical access Lack of required host security software VPN Risks Strong user authentication Host identity verification Secure desktop Configuration considerations Education and awareness Security posture validation Wireless Network Example: Bluetooth Introduced in 1994 Speed is 2.4 GHZ and range is between 10 to 30m Short-range wireless communications technology Uses radio waves for communication Bluetooth Attack Example Bluejacking is the unauthorized sending of text messages to a nearby Bluetooth device. Bluetooth Countermeasures Use Bluetooth for confidential information Change the default PINs on your devices Do not leave your devices in discovery mode Turn off Bluetooth when it’s not in active use Bluetooth Vulnerability: BlueBorne It is a set of nine exploitable Bluetooth vulnerabilities. It affects every laptop and mobile device. The airborne attack is difficult to protect. Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID) Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID) RFID uses radio waves to read and capture information stored on a tag attached to an object. RFID Risks Externality Risk Business Process Risk Business Intelligence Risk Privacy Risk RFID Security Controls Operational Management Technical Case Study: RFID Hack Uses near-field communication (NFC) Guests download an app to their phones Opens the door with signals Mobile Keys and Bluetooth Emanation Security It is a hardware or electronic device that emits electromagnetic radiation. Controls Against Electronics Faraday Cage White Noise Control Zones Network Security Controls Network-Based Security Prevents computer network from: Trojan Horses Denial of service Hacking, viruses, and spyware Email spoofing Unauthorized access Network Attack Categories Active attack Passive attack An intruder initiates commands to disrupt the network's normal operation. An intruder intercepts data traveling through the network. Firewall Allows users to access the internet Controls network traffic Stops hackers from accessing network Firewall Features Is a combination of hardware and software Controls the vulnerable point between a corporate network and the internet Unified Threat Management (UTM) UTM combines several key elements of network security to offer a comprehensive security package to buyers. Unified Threat Management (UTM) • Simplicity • Streamlined installation and maintenance • Centralized control • Single point of failure • Single point of compromise • Performance issues Goals Issues Web Application Firewall Filters, monitors, and blocks HTTP traffic Filters the content of specific web applications Prevents attacks from web application security flaws Intrusion Detection System (IDS) Intrusion Detection System otherwise known as IDS is monitored network usage anomaly. ●Operates in the background ●Alerts when intrusions are detected ●Protects external and internal misuse ●Works together with firewalls and routers Intrusion Detection System Components Sensor User Interface Analyzer Admin Console Intrusion Detection System Categories Network-based IDS (NIDS) Host-based IDS (HIDS) An intruder initiates commands to disrupt the network's normal operation. An intruder intercepts data traveling through the network. Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) • Closely related to IDS • Designed to detect and prevent attacks • Must be properly configured and tuned to be effective Network Admission Control It is a concept of controlling access to an environment through strict adherence and implementation of security policy. Network Admission Control Goals Prevent/reduce zero-day attacks Enforce security policy throughout the network Use identities to perform access control Honeypots Enable services and ports Have services emulated A honeypot system is a computer that sits in the screened subnet or the DMZ and attempts to lure attackers. Honeypots Group of honeypots implemented together is called a honeynet. Security Testing Vulnerability Scanning It is a process of examining your systems and network devices for security holes and weaknesses. Vulnerability Scanning Vulnerability scanners are designed to help administrators and address vulnerabilities. Vulnerability Scan Goals • Identify vulnerability • Identify lack of security controls • Identify common misconfigurations Some scanners are capable of remediation checking for misconfigurations. Penetration Testing Emulates the same methods attackers would use Uncovers any weaknesses within the environment Tries to exploit the system The most aggressive form of security testing Simulates an attack from a malicious outsider. Types of Penetration Testing The types depend on the organization, its security objectives, and the management goals. Types of Penetration Testing In black box testing, the tester has no knowledge of the internal design or features of the system. It simulates the external attacker the best. Types of Penetration Testing In white box testing, the tester has complete knowledge of the internal system, it may yield a more complete result, but it may not be representative of an external hacker. It may be a good indicator of an internal type of threat. Types of Penetration Testing In grey box testing, some information about internal working is given to the tester. • Helps guide tester tactics • Mitigates the risks Security Audits Security Audits These are systematic evaluations performed with the purpose of demonstrating the effectiveness of controls to a third party. Security Audits It is performed by independent auditors. Auditors provide unbiased view of the state of security controls. Types of Security Audits • It is performed by an organization’s internal staff. • The reports are intended for internal audience. Disadvantage: Conflict of interest and hidden agenda • It is performed by third-party auditors. • The reports are intended for third-party stakeholders. • NDA is a prerequisite. Disadvantage: Cost Key Takeaways Networks are part of a large, centrally managed, internetworked architecture solutions. Wireless networks are computer networks that are not connected by cables of any kind. Network-based protection or security is a method of preventing your computer network from unauthorized user access. Security testing is a process of examining your systems and network devices for security holes and weaknesses.