Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 1: Network Theory and Architecture CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 1-14: Unified Communication Technologies Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Define Unified Communications as it relates to networking. • List technologies and devices that can be included in UC. • Discuss the challenges UC services can have on a network. • Explain the use of Quality of Service (QoS) to improve UC services. Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. • Unified Communications (UC) is a marketing term, not a standard. • UC refers to the merger of voice, video, and other communication onto the data network. Unified Communications Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. UC Technologies • UC technologies may include: • Voice-over-IP (VoIP) phone services • Video conferencing and video streaming • Realtime services such as chat or instant messaging (IM) • Presence indication • Desktop sharing • Interactive whiteboards • eFax services Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. UC Components • UC Devices • VoIP Phones • Video cameras • Video Teleconference systems (VTC) • Audio and music devices • UC Servers – servers designed to support one or more unified communication technologies, such as VoIP phone servers, video conferencing servers, or media servers. • UC Gateways – networking gateways which support UC protocols such as QoS Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Network Challenges • Delay – packets arriving too slowly • Dropped packets • Error – corrupted packets • Jitter – variation in packet delay • Out-of-order delivery • Multicast vs. Unicast – Multicast uses less bandwidth Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QoS – Quality of Service • TCP/IP is a “best effort” protocol, not designed with UC in mind. • Quality of Service (QoS) is a way to prioritize traffic on a network, so that sensitive UC packets are less likely to be delayed or dropped. • DSCP – Differentiated Services Code Point (DiffServ), a field in an IP packet which species IP Precedence and Type of Service. • Guaranteed Service – high quality with guaranteed minimum latency • Controlled load – high quality without guaranteed latency • Class of Service (COS) –adds a 3-bit field called Priority Code Point (PCP) to an Ethernet Frame, ranging from 0 (“best effort”) to 4 (“controlled load” / steaming media) to 7 (“layer 2 network control reserved”). • QoS services must be available and enabled on all appropriate switches, routers, and other devices. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Quiz Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Unified Communications is: 1 a standard a protocol a packet format a marketing term Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Unified Communications is: Unified Communication is a marketing term. d. a standard a protocol a packet format a marketing term 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which of the following best describes Quality of Service (QoS)? 2 a measurement of dropped packets a way to prioritize packets on a network. an encryption protocol the distance between packets Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which of the following best describes Quality of Service (QoS)? Quality of Service (QoS) is a way to prioritize packets on a network. b. a measurement of dropped packets a way to prioritize packets on a network. an encryption protocol the distance between packets 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Unified Communications (UC) is a marketing term which refers to the merger of voice, video, and other communication onto the data network. • UC technologies may include VoIP phone services, video conferencing, chat and IM, and presence indication. • UC Servers are servers designed to support one or more unified communication technologies, such as VoIP phone servers. • Quality of Service (QoS) is a way to prioritize traffic on a network, so that sensitive UC packets are less likely to be delayed or dropped. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Cloud and Virtualization’. This concludes ‘Unified Communication Technologies’.