Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 1: Network Theory and Architecture CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 1-13: Routing Concepts Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: Explain the purpose of routing protocols. Describe the difference between distance vector, link state, and hybrid routing protocols. Discuss the use of routing tables with static and dynamic routes. Define routing metrics such as distance (hops), MTU, bandwidth, and costs. Explain administrative distance. Label RIPv2, BGP, OSPF, and IS-IS as distance vector, link state, or hybrid protocols. Define route aggregation and route redistribution. Discuss strategies to maintain high availability with regards to routing. Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Routers • Small networks usually have just one router. • Larger networks may have many routers to: • Break up broadcast domains • Connect remote locations • Separate logical divisions/departments Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Routing Tables • Each Router creates and maintains a Routing Table to determine which interface will be used for each packet being routed. • At a minimum, each network identified is listed with an associated interface and one or more metrics. • If the same network is available through multiple interfaces, the interface with the best route (metrics) is used. • Routing Tables can be constructed manually (static) or automatically (dynamic). • If a Table contains both static and dynamic entries, the static entries are prioritized. • A default route can be programmed for networks not listed in the table. Routing Table 192.168.1.0 E0 0 192.168.2.0 S0 0 192.168.3.0 S0 1 192.168.4.0 S0 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Dynamic Routes • Calculating the best route dynamically requires work from the router. • Best routes can be calculated based on various routing metrics, including: • Hop count (how many routers away is it?) • MTU, bandwidth (packet size and speed) • Latency (how fast does the next router respond?) • Costs (set by administrator) • Administrative distance – a measurement of perceived quality of a route, based on the routing protocol and/or source of the routing table data, measured from 1 to 255. • SPB – Shortest Path Bridging, 802.1aq. SPB is a newer technology intended to simplify the configuration of networks while enabling multipath routing. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Routing Loop • Router A has a packet to send to Router C. • Its routing table tells that sending to Router B is the best route, so it does so. • Router B checks its routing table for the best route to Router C, and finds it’s through Router A; so it sends the packet back to A. • This is a Routing Loop • Most routing protocols work to avoid loops • Looping packets will generally be dropped when they’ve traversed more than 15 routers. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Interior vs. Exterior • Routing protocols can be classified as Interior or Exterior Gateway Routing Protocols (IGRP or EGRP) • Interior means within a given Autonomous System (AS) – a collection of networks and subnets under the same administrative control. • Exterior means outside a given AS, also outside of your designated network domain. • If an AS is registered with the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority to present its clearly defined routing policy to the Internet, it will have an Autonomous System Number (ASN). Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Distance Vector Routing Protocols • Distance Vector protocols use distance – measured in hops – to calculate the best route. • Each router shares its routing table with neighboring routers, who merge it with theirs and share again. • The time it takes for all routers to finish merging their tables is called convergence. • Distance Vector Routing Protocols include: • RIP (Routing Information Protocol) • RIPv2 (recommended for small networks) • IGRP (Interior Gateway Routing Protocol) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Link State Routing Protocols • Link State Protocols (also called Path First Protocols) create three separate tables for direct neighbors, the network topology (including best path and backup path to each network), and a routing table. • Link State protocols include: • OSPF (Open Shortest Path First) • IS-IS (Intermediate System to Intermediate System) • Both divide networks into “Areas” for faster processing. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Hybrid Protocols • Hybrid protocols combine elements of Distance Vector and Link State routing protocols. • EIGRP (Enhanced IGRP) – includes the subnet mask along with the route updates, supports CIDR and IPv6. • BGP (Border Gateway Protocol) – the main routing protocol of the Internet, can also be used in local networks. Measures 10 attributes of all connected networks, including distance. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. • Route Redistribution – the translation that occurs when different parts of a network use different routing protocols. • Route Aggregation – minimizing routing tables by consolidating multiple routes into a single route advertisement. • Loopback Interface – a logical, virtual interface in a router, used by OSPF, BGP, and other protocols to maintain communication when physical interfaces are down. Other Terms Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. High Availability • Networks should be designed to resist any single point of failure – a feature known as High Availability. • A virtual IP and virtual MAC address is created for a redundant group of routers. • One router is designated “Master”, the others are designated “Backup”. Master assumes the virtual IP and MAC on a virtual interface. • Hosts on the network use the virtual IP/MAC for their Gateway. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. High Availability (contd.) • Master and Backups communicate every 30 seconds with a “hello” message – if the Master does not respond, a Backup assumes the virtual IP and MAC. • Protocols which use this arrangement include: • HSRP (Hot Standby Router Protocol) – proprietary to Cisco • VRRP (Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol) – open standard hello? Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Quiz Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. A collection of networks and subnets under the same administrative control is __________. 1 a. Autonomous System b. routing loop c. distance vector d. routing table Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. A collection of networks and subnets under the same administrative control is __________. An Autonomous System (AS) is a collection of networks and subnets under the same administrative control. a. Autonomous System routing loop distance vector routing table 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which of the following is an example of a distance vector routing protocol? 2 BGP OSPF VRRP RIPv2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which of the following is an example of a distance vector routing protocol? RIPv2 is an example of a distance vector routing protocol. d. BGP OSPF VRRP RIPv2 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. A protocol which stages a redundant group of routers to maintain high availability is_______. 3 BGP OSPF VRRP RIPv2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. A protocol which stages a redundant group of routers to maintain high availability is_______. VRRP and HSRP are high availability protocols which stage a redundant group of routers to maintain high availability. c. BGP OSPF VRRP RIPv2 3 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Each Router uses a Routing Table to determine which interface will be used for each packet being routed. • Routing Tables can be constructed manually (static) or automatically (dynamic). • Routing tables include metrics for each network which can include distance (hops), MTU (packet size), bandwidth, latency, and costs. • An Autonomous System (AS) is a collection of networks and subnets under the same administrative control. • Hybrid routing protocols combine elements of Distance Vector and Link State routing protocols. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Unified Communication Technologies’. This concludes ‘Routing Concepts’.