Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 4: Trouble Shooting CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 4-7: Troubleshooting Common Security Issues Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Discuss the security vulnerabilities related to misconfigured firewalls, ACLs, and applications. • Define a Denial of Service (DoS) attack. • Describe the Ping of Death attack. • Explain the risk associated with default passwords and backdoor access. • Identify the difference between trusted and untrusted users. • Define jamming as it relates to wireless networks. • Discuss the security implications of firmware and OS patches. Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Security Problems 101 • Security issues fall into three categories: • Someone has access where they shouldn’t. • Someone doesn’t have access where they should. • Defending the network from malicious attacks. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Malicious Users • Malicious users seek to damage the network or to improperly use the organization’s resources for personal gain. • Untrusted users are those outside the organization with no valid access to any private part of the network. • Trusted users are generally those inside the organization or who have valid credentials to access some portion of the network. • Trusted malicious users are a great risk since they have more opportunities to gain access to the network, such as planting backdoor accounts or connecting a packet sniffer to an unprotected switch. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Firewall Configuration Issues • Firewall misconfiguration manifests in one of the two ways: • Traffic is allowed that should be blocked. • Traffic is blocked that should be allowed (maybe all). • Firewall rules explicitly allow or deny traffic from specific IP addresses and/or ports, and packet content in some cases, so reviewing the rules should show the problem. • Remember that rules are processed in order – lower rules may not apply if a higher rule’s criteria is met. • Remember the “Implicit Deny” rule – adding an explicit deny may help with logging and troubleshooting. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Other Configuration Issues • ACL misconfiguration: similar to a Firewall, the ACL allows or denies traffic based on a set of rules. • ACL rules are usually stateless – they can only be based on IP address or port. • Just like a firewall ACL rules generally include an implicit deny. • Application misconfiguration occurs when an application – especially applications which must be exposed through the firewall – do not have proper restrictions in place and could allow users access to other secure resources. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Edge Issues The edge or border is where your LAN interacts with the WAN. Edge issues can include: • Denial of Service (DoS or DDoS) – an intentional or unintentional disruption of service due to overwhelming traffic to a server or network device. • DDoS attacks can be mitigated with the use of a proxy server and/or help from your WAN vendor. • Ping of Death – a special type of DoS attack using a malformed ping packet which, when reassembled can cause buffer overflows or system crashes on the receiving server. Ping of Death is routinely filtered out by firewalls and ISPs today. • Open/Closed ports – open ports allow packets to flow to or from a device, while closed ports drop traffic to the device. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Edge Issues (contd.) • Unreachable default gateway – if your default gateway (router) is unreachable, traffic can’t flow to or from the WAN. • An ICMP command, route redirect, can be used to redirect traffic from a default gateway to an alternate gateway (presumably under the attacker’s control) to be used as a “man-in-the-middle” style attack. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Authentication Issues (TACACS/RADIUS Misconfiguration) • TACACS+ and RADIUS are forms of Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA) servers that verify users before allowing them access to certain network resources (APs, VPNs, switches, etc.) • AAA solutions involve three elements – a client (requesting access), a supplicant (the device the client is connecting to), and the server. • AAA misconfiguration can occur when: • Client and server are using different ports • Client and server are not using the correct pre-shared key (PSK) • Supplicant is configured for the wrong RADIUS or TACACS+ server group • User isn’t configured on the AAA server • Some AAA servers also include a default user and password – make sure this is changed so it’s not available to an unauthorized user. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Backdoor Access • Many devices (routers, servers, switches) are configured with default administrator accounts. • These accounts should be disabled or changed to prevent unauthorized use. • In some cases temporary users with access to administrative credentials may plant their own username and password onto a system for their own future unauthorized use (backdoor access). Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. ARP Cache Poisoning • ARP – Address Resolution Protocol, used to translate IP addresses into MAC addresses. • ARP Cache – a table each device builds and maintains which matches IP addresses to MAC addresses based on ARP packets received (not just ARP packets requested). • ARP Cache Poisoning is a technique by which a local machine sends ARP packets to redirect IP packets intended for another device to itself or to another host. • Only works on the local segment • Also called ARP Spoofing or ARP Poison Routing Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Banner Grabbing/OUI • Banners are messages generated by a router, firewall, or other network device in response to an error. • Organizationally Unique Identifiers (OUI) are the first 24 bits of a MAC address and identify the manufacturer of the device. • By using protocols such as telnet or SSH attackers can try to reach key network components. Even if unsuccessful, the information gleaned from the banner or from the OUI can provide the hacker with important information regarding the type of device so they can research and exploit any known weaknesses. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain/Local Group Configuration • On an Active Directory network, Domain Local groups are a type of user group which can assign access to users who are outside of the local domain. • Improperly configuring a domain local group or assigning a trusted user to a domain local group may give them access to network resources beyond what was intended. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Jamming • Jamming is a wireless technique to block access to certain frequencies by flooding the airwaves with a powerful signal. • It can be used in an “evil twin” style attack where the attacker sets up their own AP on a different channel than the organization’s APs, then jams the frequencies of the real APs. • Wireless clients will not be able to “see” the real APs and thus will connect to the rogue AP instead. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Patches and Malware • Firmware and Operating System patches are often used to close vulnerabilities that could allow an intruder access to your equipment. • Malware protection is important for any PC or Server, and malware definitions are often updated daily to include recently discovered strains of known malware and viruses. • Keeping your patches and malware definitions up to date helps to prevent intruders from exploiting your systems. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Quiz Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. A user inside the organization who has valid credentials is a ___________ . 1 Trusted User Untrusted User Malicious User Domain Local Group Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. The correct answer is A user inside the organization who has valid credentials is a ___________ . 1 Trusted User Untrusted User Malicious User Domain Local Group A trusted user is a user inside the organization who has valid credentials. a Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. What is the Ping of Death? 2 a command line utility a broadcast storm a side effect of the implicit deny rule a type of DoS attack Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. The correct answer is What is the Ping of Death? 2 a command line utility a broadcast storm a side effect of the implicit deny rule a type of DoS attack Ping of Death is a special type of Denial of Service (DoS) attack using a malformed ping packet. d Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Trusted users are generally those inside the organization or who have valid credentials to access some portion of the network. • Firewall misconfiguration manifests in either traffic being allowed that should be blocked or traffic being blocked that should be allowed (sometimes all). • Ping of Death – a special type of DoS attack using a malformed ping packet which, when reassembled can cause buffer overflows or system crashes on the receiving server. • Jamming is a wireless technique to block access to certain frequencies by flooding the airwaves with a powerful signal. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Troubleshooting Common WAN Issues’. This concludes ‘Troubleshooting Common Security Issues’.