Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 4: Trouble Shooting CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 4-1: Troubleshooting Methodologies Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Discuss troubleshooting methodologies. • Explain the bottom-to-top and top-to-bottom OSI troubleshooting models. • Describe how Divide-and-Conquer applies to troubleshooting. Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The Troubleshooting Process • Troubleshooting should be a methodical process. • Haphazard guesses are more likely to make a problem worse than better. • When presented with a troubleshooting scenario, use these steps to maximize your chance of resolving the situation in minimal time. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. 1. Identify the Problem • Gather information and Question Users • Get as much information as possible from users, from system logs, and from your own observation. • Check the scope of the problem – is it unique to one device, one subnet, one application, or one type of network service? • Duplicate the problem, if possible • Don’t rely on user information alone – users are often mistaken about what exactly is happening, especially with sporadic problems. • Duplicating the problem is the best way to confirm the nature and scope of the problem and to establish a reliable baseline for testing. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. 1. Identify the Problem (contd.) • Identify Symptoms • Document symptoms which are clearly related to the problem, for example specific error messages, missing network resources, etc. • Determine if anything has changed • Many (perhaps most) sudden problems occur because something changed. • Was new hardware added, locally or on the network? • Did any software or settings change? • Tracing any changes which occurred when the network problem appeared (recently or before) is often the fastest route to a solution. • Approach multiple problems individually • Multiple symptoms, even when they appear nearly simultaneously, can be confusing or even misleading – focus on one set of symptoms at a time and trace them to their root cause Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. 2. Establish a Theory of Probable Cause • Question the obvious! • How long has this problem been happening? • What were you doing when the error first happened? • Is your computer on? • Is your network connected? • Can you access other network resources? • Are other users having the same problem? Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. 2. Establish a Theory of Probable Cause (contd.) • Consider multiple troubleshooting approaches to establish a theory of what’s wrong: • Bottom-to-Top OSI Model • Is the physical connection OK? (layer 1) • Do we have a data link? (link indicator) • Do we have an IP address? • Can we browse the Internet or other network resources? • Are any applications working? (HTTP, Mail, ICMP/Ping) • Top-to-Bottom OSI Model 1 - Physical 2 - Data Link 3 - Network 4 - Transport 5 - Session 6 - Presentation 7 -Application Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Troubleshooting Approaches (contd.) • Divide-and-Conquer: How can you split the scope of the problem into two pieces, to determine which piece has the problem? • Test one subnet (disconnect if needed). • Move the faulty device to a different part of the network. • Try connecting to other network resources. • Try alternate software. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. 3. Testing Your Theory • Once you have a theory on the cause of the problem, how do you prove it? • Think about what ELSE must happen if your theory is true. • Possible ways to prove your theory: • Replace part • Change setting • Swap computers • Change user accounts/login credentials • Once your theory is confirmed, what is your next step to resolve the problem? • If your theory is not confirmed, re-establish a new theory or escalate the problem Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. 4. Implement and Verify • Establish a plan of action to resolve the problem and identify potential effects. • Include appropriate vendors, contractors, and stakeholders as necessary. • Request and receive any appropriate approvals. • Implement the solution or escalate as necessary • Verify full system functionality and, if applicable, implement preventative measures • Document findings, actions, and outcomes • Inform users and stakeholders of any changes in equipment or recommended operating procedures. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Quiz Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. A user reports a network connectivity problem. Which of the following steps should the technician perform FIRST? 1 Determine the probable cause Implement the solution of the cause Identify the problem Test the theory of the cause Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. A user reports a network connectivity problem. Which of the following steps should the technician perform FIRST? The first step in troubleshooting is to identify the problem. c. Determine the probable cause Implement the solution of the cause Identify the problem Test the theory of the cause 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Splitting the scope of the problem into two parts is called: 2 Subnetting Divide and Conquer Identifying the problem Implement and Verify Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Splitting the scope of the problem into two parts is called: Divide-and-Conquer is a troubleshooting methodology that involves splitting the scope of the problem into two parts. b. Subnetting Divide and Conquer Identifying the problem Implement and Verify 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Troubleshooting should be a methodical process. • The troubleshooting process starts with getting as much information as possible from users, from system logs, and from your own observation. • An important part of troubleshooting is determining if anything has changed recently. • The bottom-to-top OSI troubleshooting model starts with verifying physical layer connections. • The Divide-and-Conquer troubleshooting approach involves splitting the scope of the problem into two pieces, to determine which piece has the problem. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Troubleshooting Tools’. This concludes ‘Troubleshooting Methodologies’.