Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 1: Network Theory and Architecture CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 1-5: Network Devices Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. ● Define and describe the appropriate use for Routers, Switches, Hubs and Access Points. ● Identify the benefit of a Multilayer Switch (MLS). ● Explain the purpose of Firewalls, IDS, IPS, HIDS, and Content Filtering devices. ● Describe the function of Packet Shapers, Load Balancers, VPN Concentrators, and Analog Modems. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: Network Devices Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Routers and Bridges Routers connect separate networks. • MUST be distinct, addressing schemes (IP subnets or similar) on each network • Routers route packets between networks by using routing tables or routing policy, forwarding packets to the next connected router closest to the packet’s destination. Bridges connect similar networks. • MUST be identical, addressing schemes (IP subnets or similar) on both sides. • Establishes separate Collision Domains, minimizing traffic across the network. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Hub • Hubs are obsolete, replaced by Switches. • Hubs connect multiple wired network devices as if all were on the same cable. • All traffic is rebroadcasted to all ports on the hub. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Switch A Switch is a “Hub with Brains” • A Switch is a “Layer 2” device – it reads the MAC address from the Frame. • If the MAC address is known to be connected to a specific port on the Switch, ONLY that port receives the traffic. • Each port on a Switch is therefore a unique collision domain. • If the Switch cannot identify which port includes the destination MAC Address, the frame is forwarded to all ports. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Switch (contd.) • Simple Switches are Unmanaged and not directly accessible. They work automatically with no configuration options. • More complex Switches are Managed, with their own accessible IP address and the ability to be configured and monitored via SNMP. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. A Multilayer Switch (MLS) is a typical Switch at OSI Layer 2, but also performs Routing or other functions at Layers 3 or higher. • Advanced functions in an MLS may include: • Packet Routing • Qos and VLAN Routing • Load Balancing • Content Filtering Multilayer Switch Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Firewall A Firewall protects your network by keeping unauthorized traffic off the network. • Can be a hardware device or software • Enforces traffic rules between the public side and the private side. • Can often designate one or more private side addresses as being in the “DMZ”, Demilitarized Zone, making them open to the public side without the firewall’s defenses. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) and Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPS) • IDS monitor network or system activities, looking for signs of malicious activity or policy violations. • Incidents are reported and logged • IPS include IDS functions but also attempt to stop or block the suspicious activity. • Both are network devices (appliances), but can be implemented as software applications as well. IDS/IPS Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. HIDS HOST Intrusion Detection Systems (HIDS) • A HIDS is an application running on a host computer which monitors the host for suspicious activity via system logs and active applications. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Access Point • Wireless devices can connect to each other using Ad-Hoc Mode. • No central hardware is required, but ad-hoc networks generally perform poorly and cannot connect to outside networks. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Access Point (contd.) • An Access Point connects one or more wireless devices in Infrastructure Mode. • In Infrastructure Mode, the Access Point functions as a hub for the wireless devices. • An Access Point can also connect to a Wired network, creating a transparent bridge between the wireless and wired devices. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Content Filter • A Content Filter is an appliance or program which scans network traffic for content and filters out designated content or content types. • Content filtering may be based on a Blacklist, which includes specific sites, regions, or types of content that should be filtered out. • A Whitelist designates which content should be allowed, and all other content is filtered out. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Load Balancer A Load Balancer sends network traffic through one of two or more possible pathways, to minimize network congestion on either segment. Typical load balancing algorithms include: • Scheduled • Least-Load • Fault Tolerance • Fastest Response • Content-Aware Switching Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Analog Modem Modem stands for Modulator/De-Modulator An Analog Modem modulates an analog carrier signal to encode digital information. Analog Modems connect computers via traditional phone lines at up to 56kbps. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. A Packet Shaper or Traffic Shaper controls how Packets are transmitted on a network. • Packet Shaping provides several benefits: • Prioritizing critical applications, such as VoIP or Video • Containing disruptive traffic such as large file downloads Packet Shaper Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. • A VPN Concentrator accepts multiple VPN connections. • Specifically built for handling the encryption and authentication needed for multiple VPN sessions. • Can offload VPN responsibilities from a router or server VPN Concentrator Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Quiz Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. A network address which is unprotected by the firewall is in the _____. 1 Subnet WAN DMZ Load Balancer Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. A network address which is unprotected by the firewall is in the _____. An address in the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) is unprotected by the firewall. c. Subnet WAN DMZ Load Balancer 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Each port on a switch is a unique_____________. 2 Subnet Collision Domain Broadcast Domain Packet Label Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Each port on a switch is a unique_____________. Each port on a switch is a unique collision domain. b. Subnet Collision Domain Broadcast Domain Packet Label 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. A router connects two networks. What must be true of the networks in order for the router to function properly? 3 Must be on the same WAN Must be in the same collision domain. Must be in the same broadcast domain Must have distinctly different addressing schemes. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. A router connects two networks. What must be true of the networks in order for the router to function properly? Routers connect different networks -- each must have a different addressing scheme. d. Must be on the same WAN Must be in the same collision domain. Must be in the same broadcast domain Must have distinctly different addressing schemes. 3 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary ● A Router connects separate networks with distinct addressing schemes. ● A Switch connects wired computers, with each port becoming its own collision domain. ● An Access Point is necessary for a wireless network to operate in infrastructure mode and to connect to a wired network. ● An Intrusion Detection System (IDS) monitors network traffic looking for malicious activity. ● An Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) monitors for and attempts to block suspicious activity. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn, All rights reserved. This concludes ‘Network Devices’ The next lesson is ‘Basic Network Concepts’