Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 1: Network Theory and Architecture CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 1-15: Cloud and Virtualization Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Describe virtualization, including virtual servers, virtual switches, and virtual network interfaces. • Define software defined networking (SDN). • Explain the use of a Storage Area Network (SAN). • Define iSCSI, Fibre Channel, and Jumbo Frames. • Explain the use of and differences between Software-as-a-Service (SaaS), Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS), and Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) • Differentiate between public, private, hybrid, and community clouds. Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. • “The Cloud” is a term for the Internet and services hosted through the Internet. • Operating in “The Cloud” has created an entirely new type of environment. • Creating and maintaining “The Cloud” requires some special technologies. The Cloud Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. • Hardware and software can be the same thing. • Virtualization is the creation of virtual devices (computers, routers, switches) which are not directly tied to physical components. Virtualization Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Virtualization Components • Host – the machine on which the virtualization takes place • Guest – the virtualized machine or device • Hypervisor – the software which creates and supports the virtual environment Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Benefits of Virtualization • Portability– virtual machines can be moved from host to host as needed. • Scalability – virtual machines can be easily increased, decreased, and multiplied. • Failover and load balancing – virtual machines can be moved to a new host when one host fails or needs additional capacity. • Energy saving – multiple virtual machines can be combined on one physical host, saving energy and cooling costs. • Faster/easier provisioning – new virtual equipment can be created quickly and easily within a virtual environment. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Virtual Infrastructure • Virtual computers can connect virtually through virtual infrastructure, including: • Virtual Switches • Virtual Routers • Virtual Firewalls • Virtual NICs connect to physical NICs through bridging. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Virtual Network Interfaces • Some routers include virtual network interfaces in addition to their physical interfaces • Virtual network interfaces: • Have their own MAC address • Will be assigned IP addresses just like a physical interface • Connect to physical interfaces through bridging Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Software Defined Networking (SDN) • SDN is a method for abstracting the control decisions in a network device from the hardware and lower level functionality. • SDN can be more scalable, manageable, and cost-effective than traditional networking. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Storage Area Network • A Storage Area Network (SAN) is a network dedicated to storage. • SAN storage is accessible to network devices as if it were local storage. • SAN storage is block-level accessible, supporting any file system. • Network Attached Storage (NAS) refers to a file-level server sharing data on a network. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. iSCSI and Fibre Channel • SCSI – Small Computer Systems Interface, a type of data connection to local hard drives or other storage • iSCSI – Internet Small Computer Systems Interface, an IP-based data standard to connect data storage facilities to network devices, often used in SANs. • Fibre Channel – a high speed data connection protocol, functionally similar to iSCSI but communicates through a direct connection (copper or fiber optic) between the storage and the host. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Jumbo Frame • A traditional ethernet frame is limited to 1500 bytes. • Jumbo frame is the term used for ethernet frames over 1500 bytes, up to 9000 bytes. • Jumbo frames can reduce network bandwidth, especially in storage networks, by reducing the administrative overhead of frame headers. • The risk with jumbo frames is the increased chance of CRC32 errors and having to retransmit large frames when they occur. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Cloud Computing • Cloud computing is a solution where a pool of computer resources is shared with users, generally on a subscription basis, from a centrally hosted solution. Cloud computing can be grouped into three general categories: • Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) – software applications, often web-based, in which software licensing and delivery is provided on a centrally-hosted subscription basis. • Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS) – a solution where clients can build and run their own web apps using a shared cloud-based platform. PaaS makes it easy to build applications without the need to build low level functionality and virtualization. • Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) – a cloud computing solution which provides hosted infrastructure components such as servers, storage, backup, and network connectivity. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Cloud Types • Public – cloud services which are shared with other unrelated users or organizations in a multi-tenant arrangement. • Private – cloud services which are entirely controlled by one organization, often inside a corporate firewall and controlled by the IT department. • Hybrid – a combination of public and private clouds, where some components are managed in-house (private) while others are provided by a third party (public). • Community – a special type of private cloud which is shared by several organizations but not generally available to the public. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Quiz Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. What is the difference between a Storage Area Network (SAN) and Network Attached Storage (NAS)? 1 SAN is a block-level storage system while NAS is a file-level system NAS uses jumbo frames while SAN does not SAN is virtualized They are different terms for the same concept Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. What is the difference between a Storage Area Network (SAN) and Network Attached Storage (NAS)? A SAN provides block-level storage accessible to servers on the network, a NAS is a file-level server that shares data on the network. a. SAN is a block-level storage system while NAS is a file-level system NAS uses jumbo frames while SAN does not SAN is virtualized They are different terms for the same concept 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. A cloud vendor provides a platform which allows you to build your own application using their system. The best term to describe this is _______. 2 SaaS IaaS PaaS Virtual Network Interface Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. A cloud vendor provides a platform which allows you to build your own application using their system. The best term to describe this is _______. Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS) is a solution where clients can build and run their own web apps using a shared cloud-based platform. c. SaaS IaaS PaaS Virtual Network Interface 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Your organization has agreed to share cloud servers and infrastructure with two other companies. This is an example of __________ . 3 Private Cloud Public Cloud Hybrid Cloud Community Cloud Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Your organization has agreed to share cloud servers and infrastructure with two other companies. This is an example of __________ . A community cloud is a special type of private cloud which is shared by several organizations but not generally available to the public. d. Private Cloud Public Cloud Hybrid Cloud Community Cloud 3 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Virtualization is the creation of virtual devices (computers, routers, switches) which are not directly tied to physical components. • Virtual network interfaces have their own MAC address, are assigned IP addresses just like a physical interface, and connect to physical interfaces through bridging. • SDN is a method for abstracting the control decisions in a network device from the hardware and lower level functionality. • iSCSI – Internet Small Computer Systems Interface, an IP-based data standard to connect data storage facilities to network devices, often used in SANs. • A Public cloud is cloud services which are shared with other unrelated users or organizations in a multi-tenant arrangement. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Implementing a Network’. This concludes ‘Cloud and Virtualization’’.