Ubuntu Fundamentals Ubuntu Learning Objectives By the end of this lesson, you will be able to: Install Ubuntu Desktop Log in to your Ubuntu account Identify the kernel version Ubuntu Distribution Every two years, an Ubuntu Long Term Support (LTS) is released. For help, the technical support community is accessed. Ubuntu and its distributions are always free. All the distributions of Ubuntu are sponsored by the Canonical. Ubuntu Desktop Installation Minimum hardware requirements: 2 GHz dual-core processor 4 GB RAM 25 GB of hard-drive space Either a CD/DVD drive or a USB port for the installer media Internet access Ubuntu Desktop Installation Ubuntu can be installed by two methods: CD/DVD USB • Insert the Ubuntu DVD into your optical or DVD drive and follow the steps • Restart your computer • Most computers will automatically boot from the USB. Simply insert the USB flash drive and either start or restart your computer. Ubuntu Desktop Installation Choose your keyboard layout Ubuntu Desktop Installation Choose the apps you want to install (normal or minimal installation) Ubuntu Desktop Installation Manually set up partitions Ubuntu Desktop Installation In this screen, partition your hard drive for the installation process. Ubuntu Desktop Installation Click Continue from the pop-up window to create an empty partition table on the device. Ubuntu Desktop Installation Double click on the free space to create a partition. Ubuntu Desktop Installation Create a root partition, enter the size of the new partition out of the total free space, and set the file system type to EXT4. Enter mount point as slash from the drop-down list. Ubuntu Desktop Installation Create a swap partition or area. Ubuntu Desktop Installation Two partitions are created, one is the root partition and the second is the swap partition. Click on Continue to permit the installer to write the recent changes concerning the partitioning of the disk. Ubuntu Desktop Installation Ubuntu Desktop Installation Select the location. Ubuntu Desktop Installation Enter your name to generate the username automatically by the installer Ubuntu Desktop Installation You get the installation complete prompt after the installation process. Ubuntu Login Select the account to login. Ubuntu Login Enter the password used to create the account in the installation process. Ubuntu Login After you login, you can connect to different online accounts. Ubuntu Login If needed, set up Livepatch to keep your computer secure. Ubuntu Login Select yes or no to send usage information to Canonical and click on Next. Ubuntu Login Check the release of the installed product from the terminal window. Terminal and Console Terminal is an input interface offered by the Ubuntu OS. Console is a special type of terminal which is used when the operating system is not functioning. Kernel Architecture The image represents the architecture of a kernel. • Kernel is the core component of an operating system. • Kernel provides user interface between applications and hardware of the system. • The main functions of the kernel architecture include managing CPU, memory, and IO devices. Kernel Version # uname - r command is used to find the kernel version. Key Takeaways Ubuntu distributions are sponsored by the company Canonical.. Minimum 4GB of RAM is required to install Ubuntu in a system. Ubuntu can be installed either by booting from a DVD drive or USB. Kernel is the core component of the operating system. Knowledge Check Knowledge Check A. B. C. D. 1 Which of the following is the recommended hard-drive space required to install Ubuntu? 5 GB 25GB 100GB 1 GB Knowledge Check The correct answers is A. B. C. D. Which of the following is the recommended hard drive space required to install Ubuntu? 5 GB 25 GB 100 GB 1 Minimum required hard-drive space to install Ubuntu is 25 GB. C 1 GB Knowledge Check A. B. C. D. 2 Ubuntu is a version (or distribution) of which of the following operating systems? Linux Windows Android DOS Knowledge Check The correct answer is A. B. C. D. 2 Ubuntu is a version (or distribution) of which of the following operating systems? Ubuntu is a version of the Linux operating system. A Linux Windows Android DOS Knowledge Check A. B. C. D. 3 Which of the following is the file type of the Ubuntu download package? zip jar iso tar Knowledge Check The correct answer is A. B. C. D. 3 Which of the following is the file type of the Ubuntu download package? The Ubuntu download package is an iso file type. C zip jar iso tar Knowledge Check A. B. C. D. 4 Which of the following commands is used to verify the current kernel? uname -r uname –s Uname -p dmesg Knowledge Check The correct answer is A. B. C. D. 4 Which of the following commands is used to verify the current kernel? uname-r is the command used to verify the current kernel installed in the system. A uname -r uname –s Uname -p dmesg