Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 1: Network Theory and Architecture CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 1-16: Implementing a Network Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Discuss the network planning process. • Explain how environmental limitations such as distance and EMI/RFI interference sources affect your network plan. • Describe types of equipment that might be segmented for compatibility purposes. • List three considerations of planning a wireless network. • Discuss reasons to include or not include 802.1x and posture assessment in the planned security for your network. Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Implementing a Network • Let’s say you are tasked with creating a new network. • What data do you need to design the network appropriately? • How to get started? Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. List of Requirements • Start with a list of requirements for the network, provided by the stakeholders including senior management, IT directors, and key users. • If a list of requirements isn’t provided, request one. The list of requirements should include things like: • Software applications to be used • Network services such as VoIP, video conferencing, or database applications • Any special needs such as ICS/SCADA systems or medianets. • Any specific security concerns. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Device Types and Requirements • Consider the quantity and type of devices that will need to use your network. PCs, servers, printers, industrial equipment, tablets, smartphones, and any other devices should be considered. • As a rule of thumb, double the expected quantity of devices which will use the network. If the total is greater than 50 devices, consider segmenting the network into subnets to minimize broadcast traffic. • Will there be any devices with particular network requirements, such as videoconferencing or SCADA networks? Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Environmental Limitations • Keep in mind environmental limitations as you map out your network. In particular: • Copper wiring generally has a limitation of 100m – longer distances need to be broken up with switches or repeaters, or carried via fiber optic. • Wireless coverage should be mapped out with a site survey to look for dead spots. • Are there any unusual EMI or RFI sources which should be factored in? • Is there sufficient electrical power in the data room or network closet where key network infrastructure will be housed? • Consider redundant power sources or battery backups for critical network components. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Compatibility Requirements • Think about any potential compatibility issues within your planned network. • If you are implementing IPv6, does all your equipment support it? • Are there older legacy devices which require special connections or which should be segmented into their own network for security considerations? • If your network will include ICS or medianets, consider segmenting those for better performance and security. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Wired and Wireless considerations • If there is existing wiring, is it of a sufficient grade to support your planned network speeds? (e.g. Cat5e or better if 1000Mbps) • As a general rule, wired connections are preferable whenever feasible for non-mobile devices. • If multiple wireless access points are needed, consider implementing a mesh network for reliable coverage and/or 802.1x for centralized authentication. • If guests may need access to Internet or network services while at your location, consider implementing a guest WLAN and/or guest VLAN to keep their access away from secure network areas. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Security Considerations • Attention to security should be part of every step in your network planning process. • There is no such thing as “too secure”, though security considerations must be balanced against your budget and your user experience. • Think about your most likely vulnerabilities (outside hackers, malware, rogue users) and focus on hardening the network against those attacks. • Functions such as Posture Assessment and 802.1x authentication are great but may not be feasible for smaller organizations due to lack of budget or other resources. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Quiz Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which of these is NOT an environmental limitation you should factor into your network implementation plan? 1 The maximum distance of a copper cabling segment. The maximum number of expected users. The coverage area of any wireless access points. Any sources of EMI/RFI Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which of these is NOT an environmental limitation you should factor into your network implementation plan? All of these are valid considerations, but the maximum expected users is not an environmental consideration. b. The maximum distance of a copper cabling segment. The maximum number of expected users. The coverage area of any wireless access points. Any sources of EMI/RFI 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Which of these is a valid reason to use IPv4 on your network? 2 Some network equipment does not support IPv6 The network is expected to have less than 100 users. IPv4 is faster than IPv6 You want to use jumbo frames Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Which of these is a valid reason to use IPv4 on your network? If some existing network equipment does not support IPv6, this would be a valid reason to use IPv4 on your network. a. Some network equipment does not support IPv6 The network is expected to have less than 100 users. IPv4 is faster than IPv6 You want to use jumbo frames 2 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Designing a new network starts with a list of requirements for the network, provided by the stakeholders including senior management, IT directors, and key users. • As a rule of thumb, double the expected quantity of devices which will use the network and if the total is greater than 50 devices, consider segmenting the network into subnets to minimize broadcast traffic. • Copper wiring generally has a limitation of 100m – longer distances need to be broken up with switches or repeaters, or carried via fiber optic. • If using existing wiring, consider whether it is of a sufficient grade to support your planned network speeds? (e.g. Cat5e or better if 1000Mbps) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Ports and Protocols’. This concludes ‘Implementing a Network’.