Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Domain 2: Operations CompTIA Network + Exam Prep (N10-006) Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Lesson 2-3: Configuration Management Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. After completing this lesson, you will be able to: • Discuss configuration management. • Describe the use of backups and archives in configuration management. • Explain how a baseline is used in configuration management. • Discuss issues related to on-boarding and off-boarding mobile devices. • Explain the benefit of Network Access Control (NAC) • Describe the following types of configuration documentation: Network Diagram, Asset Management, IP address utilization, Vendor Documentation, Internal Operating Procedures/Policies Objectives Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Configuration Management Network Devices have many settings – speed, duplex, WAN info, LAN info, DNS info, IP schema, port settings, routing and forwarding instructions, etc. Configuration Management refers to managing the configuration of network devices and applications in your network. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Archives and Backups Data backups are essential. Configuration backups are also critical, but they are often overlooked. • Routers, firewalls, and other network devices generally provide a function to backup all configuration information to a backup file. • In the event of a hardware failure or replacement, the configuration file can be used to reprogram a replacement device with the original configuration. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Archives and Backups (contd.) Backups refer to an operational set of configuration files that can be used to reprogram equipment in the event of a hardware failure or replacement. Archives refer to multiple backups stored over a long period of time, so that prior configurations can be reviewed if needed. The terms are often used interchangeably. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Baselines We previously discussed baselines (a snapshot of “normal” functions) and baselining as it applies to network reports and metrics. Baselines are also critical for configuration management, especially when troubleshooting. Troubleshooting 101 – if it used to work, and now it doesn’t work, and nothing changed, something broke. Baselines verify the “nothing changed” element. Baseline configurations may be part of network documentation, or saved configuration files, or both. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Mobile Devices • A growing area of IT management relates to mobile devices (smartphones and tablets) and how they can be configured for an organization’s’ network. • This is referred to as Mobile Device Management (MDM). • Some organizations allow users to connect their personal mobile devices to the network – this is called Bring Your Own Device or BYOD. • MDM On-boarding determines how mobile devices are connected to the network, including what access they are granted. • MDM Off-boarding removes network settings and any organization-specific settings when a mobile device will no longer be used on the network. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Network Access Control (NAC) Network Access Control (NAC) is an extra layer of protection, implemented in some networks, which determines if a device is secure before granting access to the network. Posture Assessment – this is a check that determines if a device meets the criteria to connect to the network. This includes verifying if the device has up-to-date virus protection, OS security updates, disk encryption, and other protections. The Posture Assessment is performed by an agent on the device, which can be persistent (installed, always available) or non- persistent (runs at the time of connection but not permanently installed). Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Documentation The key to configuration management is documentation. Up-to-date, easily accessible, and easy-to-read documentation will make it easier to check configurations settings when needed. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Documentation (contd.) Good documentation may include: • Network diagrams (logical/physical) – drawings representing the cabling and device connections for the entire network. • Asset management – a list of all network devices with key specifications and details. • IP address utilization – a list of all assigned IP addresses and/or DHCP pools used by each device. • Vendor documentation – manuals and service information for any key network devices, including serial numbers and service contract details if applicable. • Internal operating procedures/policies/standards Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. Managing the configuration of network devices and applications in your network is known as ____________. 1 Backups Configuration Management Archives Network Access Control Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. Managing the configuration of network devices and applications in your network is known as ____________. Configuration Management refers to managing the configuration of network devices and applications in your network. b. Backups Configuration Management Archives Network Access Control 1 Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ a. b. c. d. The management of mobile devices, including onboarding, offboarding, and administration, is called _____ . 2 BYOD Network Administration Multicast MDM Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. QUIZ The correct answer is a. b. c. d. The management of mobile devices, including onboarding, offboarding, and administration, is called _____ . 2 The administration of mobile devices on a network is called Mobile Device Management or MDM. d. BYOD Network Administration Multicast MDM Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Here is a quick recap of what we have learned in this lesson. Summary • Configuration Management refers to managing the configuration of network devices and applications in your network. • Backups refer to an operational set of configuration files that can be used to reprogram equipment in the event of a hardware failure or replacement. • Mobile Device On-boarding determines how mobile devices are connected to the network, including what access they are granted. Off-boarding removes network settings when a mobile device will no longer be used on the network. • Network Access Control (NAC) is an extra layer of protection which determines if a device is secure before granting access to the network. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. Copyright 2015, Simplilearn. All rights reserved. The next lesson is ‘Network Segmentation’. This concludes ‘Configuration Management’.